
“come home, dear,” she said.

“when a train passes--then under a carriage, and there will be an end,”
 katusha was thinking, without heeding the girl.

and she made up her mind to do it, when, as it always happens, when a
moment of quiet follows great excitement, he, the child--his child--made
himself known within her. suddenly all that a moment before had been
tormenting her, so that it had seemed impossible to live, all her
bitterness towards him, and the wish to revenge herself, even by dying,
passed away; she grew quieter, got up, put the shawl on her head, and
went home.

wet, muddy, and quite exhausted, she returned, and from that day the
change which brought her where she now was began to operate in her soul.
beginning from that dreadful night, she ceased believing in god and
in goodness. she had herself believed in god, and believed that other
people also believed in him; but after that night she became convinced
that no one believed, and that all that was said about god and his
laws was deception and untruth. he whom she loved, and who had loved
her--yes, she knew that--had thrown her away; had abused her love. yet
he was the best of all the people she knew. all the rest were still
worse. all that afterwards happened to her strengthened her in this
belief at every step. his aunts, the pious old ladies, turned her out
when she could no longer serve them as she used to. and of all those she
met, the women used her as a means of getting money, the men, from the
old police officer down to the warders of the prison, looked at her as
on an object for pleasure. and no one in the world cared for aught but
pleasure. in this belief the old author with whom she had come together
in the second year of her life of independence had strengthened her. he
had told her outright that it was this that constituted the happiness of
life, and he called it poetical and aesthetic.

everybody lived for himself only, for his pleasure, and all the talk
concerning god and righteousness was deception. and if sometimes doubts
arose in her mind and she wondered why everything was so ill-arranged
in the world that all hurt each other, and made each other suffer, she
thought it best not to dwell on it, and if she felt melancholy she could
smoke, or, better still, drink, and it would pass.



chapter xxxviii.

sunday in prison--preparing for mass.

on sunday morning at five o’clock, when a whistle sounded in the
corridor of the women’s ward of the prison, korableva, who was already
awake, called maslova.

“oh, dear! life again,” thought maslova, with horror, involuntarily
breathing in the air that had become terribly noisome towards the
morning. she wished to fall asleep again, to enter into the region of
oblivion, but the habit of fear overcame sleepiness, and she sat up and
looked round, drawing her feet under her. the women had all got up; only
the elder children were still asleep. the spirit-trader was carefully
drawing a cloak from under the children, so as not to wake them. the
watchman’s wife was hanging up the rags to dry that served the baby
as swaddling clothes, while the baby was screaming desperately in
theodosia’s arms, who was trying to quiet it. the consumptive woman was
coughing with her hands pressed to her chest, while the blood rushed to
her face, and she sighed loudly, almost screaming, in the intervals of
coughing. the fat, red-haired woman was lying on her back, with
knees drawn up, and loudly relating a dream. the old woman accused of
incendiarism was standing in front of the image, crossing herself and
bowing, and repeating the same words over and over again. the deacon’s
daughter sat on the bedstead, looking before her, with a dull, sleepy
face. khoroshavka was twisting her black, oily, coarse hair round her
fingers. the sound of slipshod feet was heard in the passage, and the
door opened to let in two convicts, dressed in jackets and grey trousers
that did not reach to their ankles. with serious, cross faces they
lifted the stinking tub and carried it out of the cell. the women went
out to the taps in the corridor to wash. there the red-haired woman
again began a quarrel with a woman from another cell.

“is it the solitary cell you want?” shouted an old jailer, slapping the
red-haired woman on her bare, fat back, so that it sounded through the
corridor. “you be quiet.”

“lawks! the old one’s playful,” said the woman, taking his action for a
caress.

“now, then, be quick; get ready for the mass.” maslova had hardly time
to do her hair and dress when the inspector came with his assistants.

“come out for inspection,” cried a jailer.

some more prisoners came out of other cells and stood in two rows along
the corridor; each woman had to place her hand on the shoulder of the
woman in front of her. they were all counted.

after the inspection the woman warder led the prisoners to church.
maslova and theodosia were in the middle of a column of over a hundred
women, who had come out of different cells. all were dressed in white
skirts, white jackets, and wore white kerchiefs on their heads, except
a few who had their own coloured clothes on. these were wives who, with
their children, were following their convict husbands to siberia. the
whole flight of stairs was filled by the procession. the patter of
softly-shod feet mingled with the voices and now and then a laugh. when
turning, on the landing, maslova saw her enemy, botchkova, in front, and
pointed out her angry face to theodosia. at the bottom of the stairs the
women stopped talking. bowing and crossing themselves, they entered the
empty church, which glistened with gilding. crowding and pushing one
another, they took their places on the right.

after the women came the men condemned to banishment, those serving
their term in the prison, and those exiled by their communes; and,
coughing loudly, they took their stand, crowding the left side and the
middle of the church.

on one side of the gallery above stood the men sentenced to penal
servitude in siberia, who had been let into the church before the
others. each of them had half his head shaved, and their presence was
indicated by the clanking of the chains on their feet. on the other side
of the gallery stood those in preliminary confinement, without chains,
their heads not shaved.

the prison church had been rebuilt and ornamented by a rich merchant,
who spent several tens of thousands of roubles on it, and it glittered
with gay colours and gold. for a time there was silence in the church,
and only coughing, blowing of noses, the crying of babies, and now and
then the rattling of chains, was heard. but at last the convicts that
stood in the middle moved, pressed against each other, leaving a passage
in the centre of the church, down which the prison inspector passed to
take his place in front of every one in the nave.



chapter xxxix.

the prison church--blind leaders of the blind.

the service began.

it consisted of the following. the priest, having dressed in a strange
and very inconvenient garb, made of gold cloth, cut and arranged little
bits of bread on a saucer, and then put them into a cup with wine,
repeating at the same time different names and prayers. meanwhile
the deacon first read slavonic prayers, difficult to understand in
themselves, and rendered still more incomprehensible by being read very
fast, and then sang them turn and turn about with the convicts. the
contents of the prayers were chiefly the desire for the welfare of
the emperor and his family. these petitions were repeated many times,
separately and together with other prayers, the people kneeling. besides
this, several verses from the acts of the apostles were read by the
deacon in a peculiarly strained voice, which made it impossible to
understand what he read, and then the priest read very distinctly a
part of the gospel according to st. mark, in which it said that christ,
having risen from the dead before flying up to heaven to sit down at his
father’s right hand, first showed himself to mary magdalene, out of whom
he had driven seven devils, and then to eleven of his disciples, and
ordered them to preach the gospel to the whole creation, and the priest
added that if any one did not believe this he would perish, but he that
believed it and was baptised should be saved, and should besides drive
out devils and cure people by laying his hands on them, should talk in
strange tongues, should take up serpents, and if he drank poison should
not die, but remain well.

the essence of the service consisted in the supposition that the bits
cut up by the priest and put by him into the wine, when manipulated and
prayed over in a certain way, turned into the flesh and blood of god.

these manipulations consisted in the priest’s regularly lifting and
holding up his arms, though hampered by the gold cloth sack he had on,
then, sinking on to his knees and kissing the table and all that was on
it, but chiefly in his taking a cloth by two of its corners and waving
it regularly and softly over the silver saucer and golden cup. it was
supposed that, at this point, the bread and the wine turned into flesh
and blood; therefore, this part of the service was performed with the
greatest solemnity.

“now, to the blessed, most pure, and most holy mother of god,” the
priest cried from the golden partition which divided part of the church
from the rest, and the choir began solemnly to sing that it was very
right to glorify the virgin mary, who had borne christ without losing
her virginity, and was therefore worthy of greater honour than some kind
of cherubim, and greater glory than some kind of seraphim. after this
the transformation was considered accomplished, and the priest having
taken the napkin off the saucer, cut the middle bit of bread in four,
and put it into the wine, and then into his mouth. he was supposed to
have eaten a bit of god’s flesh and swallowed a little of his blood.
then the priest drew a curtain, opened the middle door in the partition,
and, taking the gold cup in his hands, came out of the door, inviting
those who wished to do so also to come and eat some of god’s flesh and
blood that was contained in the cup. a few children appeared to wish to
do so.

after having asked the children their names, the priest carefully took
out of the cup, with a spoon, and shoved a bit of bread soaked in wine
deep into the mouth of each child in turn, and the deacon, while wiping
the children’s mouths, sang, in a merry voice, that the children were
eating the flesh and drinking the blood of god. after this the priest
carried the cup back behind the partition, and there drank all the
remaining blood and ate up all the bits of flesh, and after having
carefully sucked his moustaches and wiped his mouth, he stepped briskly
from behind the partition, the soles of his calfskin boots creaking.
the principal part of this christian service was now finished, but
the priest, wishing to comfort the unfortunate prisoners, added to the
ordinary service another. this consisted of his going up to the gilt
hammered-out image (with black face and hands) supposed to represent
the very god he had been eating, illuminated by a dozen wax candles, and
proceeding, in a strange, discordant voice, to hum or sing the following
words:

“jesu sweetest, glorified of the apostles, jesu lauded by the martyrs,
almighty monarch, save me, jesu my saviour. jesu, most beautiful, have
mercy on him who cries to thee, saviour jesu. born of prayer jesu, all
thy saints, all thy prophets, save and find them worthy of the joys of
heaven. jesu, lover of men.”

then he stopped, drew breath, crossed himself, bowed to the ground, and
every one did the same--the inspector, the warders, the prisoners; and
from above the clinking of the chains sounded more unintermittently.
then he continued: “of angels the creator and lord of powers, jesu most
wonderful, the angels’ amazement, jesu most powerful, of our forefathers
the redeemer. jesu sweetest, of patriarchs the praise. jesu most
glorious, of kings the strength. jesu most good, of prophets the
fulfilment. jesu most amazing, of martyrs the strength. jesu most
humble, of monks the joy. jesu most merciful, of priests the sweetness.
jesu most charitable, of the fasting the continence. jesu most sweet,
of the just the joy. jesu most pure, of the celibates the chastity. jesu
before all ages of sinners the salvation. jesu, son of god, have mercy
on me.”

every time he repeated the word “jesu” his voice became more and
more wheezy. at last he came to a stop, and holding up his silk-lined
cassock, and kneeling down on one knee, he stooped down to the ground
and the choir began to sing, repeating the words, “jesu, son of god,
have mercy on me,” and the convicts fell down and rose again, shaking
back the hair that was left on their heads, and rattling with the chains
that were bruising their thin ankles.

this continued for a long time. first came the glorification, which
ended with the words, “have mercy on me.” then more glorifications,
ending with “alleluia!” and the convicts made the sign of the cross,
and bowed, first at each sentence, then after every two and then after
three, and all were very glad when the glorification ended, and the
priest shut the book with a sigh of relief and retired behind the
partition. one last act remained. the priest took a large, gilt cross,
with enamel medallions at the ends, from a table, and came out into the
centre of the church with it. first the inspector came up and kissed
the cross, then the jailers, then the convicts, pushing and abusing
each other in whispers. the priest, talking to the inspector, pushed the
cross and his hand now against the mouths and now against the noses of
the convicts, who were trying to kiss both the cross and the hand of the
priest. and thus ended the christian service, intended for the comfort
and the teaching of these strayed brothers.



chapter xl.

the husks of religion.

and none of those present, from the inspector down to maslova, seemed
conscious of the fact that this jesus, whose name the priest repeated
such a great number of times, and whom he praised with all these curious
expressions, had forbidden the very things that were being done there;
that he had prohibited not only this meaningless much-speaking and the
blasphemous incantation over the bread and wine, but had also, in the
clearest words, forbidden men to call other men their master, and to
pray in temples; and had ordered that every one should pray in solitude,
had forbidden to erect temples, saying that he had come to destroy
them, and that one should worship, not in a temple, but in spirit and
in truth; and, above all, that he had forbidden not only to judge, to
imprison, to torment, to execute men, as was being done here, but had
prohibited any kind of violence, saying that he had come to give freedom
to the captives.

no one present seemed conscious that all that was going on here was the
greatest blasphemy and a supreme mockery of that same christ in whose
name it was being done. no one seemed to realise that the gilt cross
with the enamel medallions at the ends, which the priest held out to the
people to be kissed, was nothing but the emblem of that gallows on which
christ had been executed for denouncing just what was going on here.
that these priests, who imagined they were eating and drinking the body
and blood of christ in the form of bread and wine, did in reality eat
and drink his flesh and his blood, but not as wine and bits of bread,
but by ensnaring “these little ones” with whom he identified himself,
by depriving them of the greatest blessings and submitting them to most
cruel torments, and by hiding from men the tidings of great joy which
he had brought. that thought did not enter into the mind of any one
present.

the priest did his part with a quiet conscience, because he was brought
up from childhood to consider that the only true faith was the faith
which had been held by all the holy men of olden times and was still
held by the church, and demanded by the state authorities. he did not
believe that the bread turned into flesh, that it was useful for the
soul to repeat so many words, or that he had actually swallowed a bit of
god. no one could believe this, but he believed that one ought to hold
this faith. what strengthened him most in this faith was the fact that,
for fulfilling the demands of this faith, he had for the last 15 years
been able to draw an income, which enabled him to keep his family, send
his son to a gymnasium and his daughter to a school for the daughters of
the clergy. the deacon believed in the same manner, and even more firmly
than the priest, for he had forgotten the substance of the dogmas of
this faith, and knew only that the prayers for the dead, the masses,
with and without the acathistus, all had a definite price, which real
christians readily paid, and, therefore, he called out his “have mercy,
have mercy,” very willingly, and read and said what was appointed, with
the same quiet certainty of its being necessary to do so with which
other men sell faggots, flour, or potatoes. the prison inspector and the
warders, though they had never understood or gone into the meaning of
these dogmas and of all that went on in church, believed that they must
believe, because the higher authorities and the tsar himself believed in
it. besides, though faintly (and themselves unable to explain why), they
felt that this faith defended their cruel occupations. if this faith
did not exist it would have been more difficult, perhaps impossible, for
them to use all their powers to torment people, as they were now doing,
with a quiet conscience. the inspector was such a kind-hearted man that
he could not have lived as he was now living unsupported by his faith.
therefore, he stood motionless, bowed and crossed himself zealously,
tried to feel touched when the song about the cherubims was being sung,
and when the children received communion he lifted one of them, and held
him up to the priest with his own hands.

the great majority of the prisoners believed that there lay a mystic
power in these gilt images, these vestments, candles, cups, crosses,
and this repetition of incomprehensible words, “jesu sweetest” and “have
mercy”--a power through which might be obtained much convenience in this
and in the future life. only a few clearly saw the deception that was
practised on the people who adhered to this faith, and laughed at it in
their hearts; but the majority, having made several attempts to get the
conveniences they desired, by means of prayers, masses, and candles, and
not having got them (their prayers remaining unanswered), were each of
them convinced that their want of success was accidental, and that
this organisation, approved by the educated and by archbishops, is very
important and necessary, if not for this, at any rate for the next life.

maslova also believed in this way. she felt, like the rest, a mixed
sensation of piety and dulness. she stood at first in a crowd behind a
railing, so that she could see no one but her companions; but when those
to receive communion moved on, she and theodosia stepped to the front,
and they saw the inspector, and, behind him, standing among the warders,
a little peasant, with a very light beard and fair hair. this was
theodosia’s husband, and he was gazing with fixed eyes at his wife.
during the acathistus maslova occupied herself in scrutinising him and
talking to theodosia in whispers, and bowed and made the sign of the
cross only when every one else did.



chapter xli.

visiting day--the men’s ward.

nekhludoff left home early. a peasant from the country was still driving
along the side street and calling out in a voice peculiar to his trade,
“milk! milk! milk!”

the first warm spring rain had fallen the day before, and now wherever
the ground was not paved the grass shone green. the birch trees in the
gardens looked as if they were strewn with green fluff, the wild cherry
and the poplars unrolled their long, balmy buds, and in shops and
dwelling-houses the double window-frames were being removed and the
windows cleaned.

in the tolkoochi [literally, jostling market, where second-hand clothes
and all sorts of cheap goods are sold] market, which nekhludoff had to
pass on his way, a dense crowd was surging along the row of booths, and
tattered men walked about selling top-boots, which they carried under
their arms, and renovated trousers and waistcoats, which hung over their
shoulders.

men in clean coats and shining boots, liberated from the factories, it
being sunday, and women with bright silk kerchiefs on their heads and
cloth jackets trimmed with jet, were already thronging at the door of
the traktir. policemen, with yellow cords to their uniforms and carrying
pistols, were on duty, looking out for some disorder which might
distract the ennui that oppressed them. on the paths of the boulevards
and on the newly-revived grass, children and dogs ran about, playing,
and the nurses sat merrily chattering on the benches. along the streets,
still fresh and damp on the shady side, but dry in the middle, heavy
carts rumbled unceasingly, cabs rattled and tramcars passed ringing by.
the air vibrated with the pealing and clanging of church bells, that
were calling the people to attend to a service like that which was now
being conducted in the prison. and the people, dressed in their sunday
best, were passing on their way to their different parish churches.

the isvostchik did not drive nekhludoff up to the prison itself, but to
the last turning that led to the prison.

several persons--men and women--most of them carrying small bundles,
stood at this turning, about 100 steps from the prison. to the right
there were several low wooden buildings; to the left, a two-storeyed
house with a signboard. the huge brick building, the prison proper, was
just in front, and the visitors were not allowed to come up to it. a
sentinel was pacing up and down in front of it, and shouted at any one
who tried to pass him.

at the gate of the wooden buildings, to the right, opposite the
sentinel, sat a warder on a bench, dressed in uniform, with gold cords,
a notebook in his hands. the visitors came up to him, and named the
persons they wanted to see, and he put the names down. nekhludoff also
went up, and named katerina maslova. the warder wrote down the name.

“why--don’t they admit us yet?” asked nekhludoff.

“the service is going on. when the mass is over, you’ll be admitted.”

nekhludoff stepped aside from the waiting crowd. a man in tattered
clothes, crumpled hat, with bare feet and red stripes all over his face,
detached himself from the crowd, and turned towards the prison.

“now, then, where are you going?” shouted the sentinel with the gun.

“and you hold your row,” answered the tramp, not in the least abashed by
the sentinel’s words, and turned back. “well, if you’ll not let me in,
i’ll wait. but, no! must needs shout, as if he were a general.”

the crowd laughed approvingly. the visitors were, for the greater
part, badly-dressed people; some were ragged, but there were also
some respectable-looking men and women. next to nekhludoff stood a
clean-shaven, stout, and red-cheeked man, holding a bundle, apparently
containing under-garments. this was the doorkeeper of a bank; he had
come to see his brother, who was arrested for forgery. the good-natured
fellow told nekhludoff the whole story of his life, and was going to
question him in turn, when their attention was aroused by a student and
a veiled lady, who drove up in a trap, with rubber tyres, drawn by a
large thoroughbred horse. the student was holding a large bundle. he
came up to nekhludoff, and asked if and how he could give the rolls he
had brought in alms to the prisoners. his fiancee wished it (this lady
was his fiancee), and her parents had advised them to take some rolls to
the prisoners.

“i myself am here for the first time,” said nekhludoff, “and don’t know;
but i think you had better ask this man,” and he pointed to the warder
with the gold cords and the book, sitting on the right.

as they were speaking, the large iron door with a window in it opened,
and an officer in uniform, followed by another warder, stepped out.
the warder with the notebook proclaimed that the admittance of visitors
would now commence. the sentinel stepped aside, and all the visitors
rushed to the door as if afraid of being too late; some even ran. at
the door there stood a warder who counted the visitors as they came
in, saying aloud, 16, 17, and so on. another warder stood inside the
building and also counted the visitors as they entered a second door,
touching each one with his hand, so that when they went away again
not one visitor should be able to remain inside the prison and not
one prisoner might get out. the warder, without looking at whom he was
touching, slapped nekhludoff on the back, and nekhludoff felt hurt by
the touch of the warder’s hand; but, remembering what he had come about,
he felt ashamed of feeling dissatisfied and taking offence.

the first apartment behind the entrance doors was a large vaulted room
with iron bars to the small windows. in this room, which was called the
meeting-room, nekhludoff was startled by the sight of a large picture of
the crucifixion.

“what’s that for?” he thought, his mind involuntarily connecting the
subject of the picture with liberation and not with imprisonment.

he went on, slowly letting the hurrying visitors pass before, and
experiencing a mingled feeling of horror at the evil-doers locked up in
this building, compassion for those who, like katusha and the boy they
tried the day before, must be here though guiltless, and shyness and
tender emotion at the thought of the interview before him. the warder
at the other end of the meeting-room said something as they passed, but
nekhludoff, absorbed by his own thoughts, paid no attention to him, and
continued to follow the majority of the visitors, and so got into the
men’s part of the prison instead of the women’s.

letting the hurrying visitors pass before him, he was the last to get
into the interviewing-room. as soon as nekhludoff opened the door of
this room, he was struck by the deafening roar of a hundred voices
shouting at once, the reason of which he did not at once understand. but
when he came nearer to the people, he saw that they were all pressing
against a net that divided the room in two, like flies settling on
sugar, and he understood what it meant. the two halves of the room,
the windows of which were opposite the door he had come in by, were
separated, not by one, but by two nets reaching from the floor to the
ceiling. the wire nets were stretched 7 feet apart, and soldiers were
walking up and down the space between them. on the further side of the
nets were the prisoners, on the nearer, the visitors. between them was
a double row of nets and a space of 7 feet wide, so that they could not
hand anything to one another, and any one whose sight was not very
good could not even distinguish the face on the other side. it was also
difficult to talk; one had to scream in order to be heard.

on both sides were faces pressed close to the nets, faces of wives,
husbands, fathers, mothers, children, trying to see each other’s
features and to say what was necessary in such a way as to be
understood.

but as each one tried to be heard by the one he was talking to, and
his neighbour tried to do the same, they did their best to drown each
other’s voices’ and that was the cause of the din and shouting which
struck nekhludoff when he first came in. it was impossible to understand
what was being said and what were the relations between the different
people. next nekhludoff an old woman with a kerchief on her head stood
trembling, her chin pressed close to the net, and shouting something to
a young fellow, half of whose head was shaved, who listened attentively
with raised brows. by the side of the old woman was a young man in
a peasant’s coat, who listened, shaking his head, to a boy very like
himself. next stood a man in rags, who shouted, waving his arm and
laughing. next to him a woman, with a good woollen shawl on her
shoulders, sat on the floor holding a baby in her lap and crying
bitterly. this was apparently the first time she saw the greyheaded man
on the other side in prison clothes, and with his head shaved. beyond
her was the doorkeeper, who had spoken to nekhludoff outside; he was
shouting with all his might to a greyhaired convict on the other side.

when nekhludoff found that he would have to speak in similar conditions,
a feeling of indignation against those who were able to make and enforce
these conditions arose in him; he was surprised that, placed in such
a dreadful position, no one seemed offended at this outrage on human
feelings. the soldiers, the inspector, the prisoners themselves, acted
as if acknowledging all this to be necessary.

nekhludoff remained in this room for about five minutes, feeling
strangely depressed, conscious of how powerless he was, and at variance
with all the world. he was seized with a curious moral sensation like
seasickness.



chapter xlii.

visiting day--the women’s ward.

“well, but i must do what i came here for,” he said, trying to pick up
courage. “what is to be done now?” he looked round for an official, and
seeing a thin little man in the uniform of an officer going up and down
behind the people, he approached him.

“can you tell me, sir,” he said, with exceedingly strained politeness of
manner, “where the women are kept, and where one is allowed to interview
them?”

“is it the women’s ward you want to go to?”

“yes, i should like to see one of the women prisoners,” nekhludoff said,
with the same strained politeness.

“you should have said so when you were in the hall. who is it, then,
that you want to see?”

“i want to see a prisoner called katerina maslova.”

“is she a political one?”

“no, she is simply . . .”

“what! is she sentenced?”

“yes; the day before yesterday she was sentenced,” meekly answered
nekhludoff, fearing to spoil the inspector’s good humour, which seemed
to incline in his favour.

“if you want to go to the women’s ward please to step this way,” said
the officer, having decided from nekhludoff’s appearance that he was
worthy of attention. “sideroff, conduct the gentleman to the women’s
ward,” he said, turning to a moustached corporal with medals on his
breast.

“yes, sir.”

at this moment heart-rending sobs were heard coming from some one near
the net.

everything here seemed strange to nekhludoff; but strangest of all was
that he should have to thank and feel obligation towards the inspector
and the chief warders, the very men who were performing the cruel deeds
that were done in this house.

the corporal showed nekhludoff through the corridor, out of the men’s
into the women’s interviewing-room.

this room, like that of the men, was divided by two wire nets; but it
was much smaller, and there were fewer visitors and fewer prisoners, so
that there was less shouting than in the men’s room. yet the same thing
was going on here, only, between the nets instead of soldiers there was
a woman warder, dressed in a blue-edged uniform jacket, with gold cords
on the sleeves, and a blue belt. here also, as in the men’s room, the
people were pressing close to the wire netting on both sides; on the
nearer side, the townspeople in varied attire; on the further side, the
prisoners, some in white prison clothes, others in their own coloured
dresses. the whole length of the net was taken up by the people standing
close to it. some rose on tiptoe to be heard across the heads of others;
some sat talking on the floor.

the most remarkable of the prisoners, both by her piercing screams and
her appearance, was a thin, dishevelled gipsy. her kerchief had slipped
off her curly hair, and she stood near a post in the middle of the
prisoner’s division, shouting something, accompanied by quick gestures,
to a gipsy man in a blue coat, girdled tightly below the waist. next
the gipsy man, a soldier sat on the ground talking to prisoner; next the
soldier, leaning close to the net, stood a young peasant, with a fair
beard and a flushed face, keeping back his tears with difficulty. a
pretty, fair-haired prisoner, with bright blue eyes, was speaking to
him. these two were theodosia and her husband. next to them was a tramp,
talking to a broad-faced woman; then two women, then a man, then again a
woman, and in front of each a prisoner. maslova was not among them. but
some one stood by the window behind the prisoners, and nekhludoff knew
it was she. his heart began to beat faster, and his breath stopped. the
decisive moment was approaching. he went up to the part of the net where
he could see the prisoner, and recognised her at once. she stood behind
the blue-eyed theodosia, and smiled, listening to what theodosia was
saying. she did not wear the prison cloak now, but a white dress,
tightly drawn in at the waist by a belt, and very full in the bosom.
from under her kerchief appeared the black ringlets of her fringe, just
the same as in the court.

“now, in a moment it will be decided,” he thought.

“how shall i call her? or will she come herself?”

she was expecting bertha; that this man had come to see her never
entered her head.

“whom do you want?” said the warder who was walking between the nets,
coming up to nekhludoff.

“katerina maslova,” nekhludoff uttered, with difficulty.

“katerina maslova, some one to see you,” cried the warder.



chapter xliii.

nekhludoff visits maslova.

maslova looked round, and with head thrown back and expanded chest,
came up to the net with that expression of readiness which he well
knew, pushed in between two prisoners, and gazed at nekhludoff with a
surprised and questioning look. but, concluding from his clothing he was
a rich man, she smiled.

“is it me you want?” she asked, bringing her smiling face, with the
slightly squinting eyes, nearer the net.

“i, i--i wished to see--” nekhludoff did not know how to address her. “i
wished to see you--i--” he was not speaking louder than usual.

“no; nonsense, i tell you!” shouted the tramp who stood next to him.
“have you taken it or not?”

“dying, i tell you; what more do you want?” some one else was screaming
at his other side. maslova could not hear what nekhludoff was saying,
but the expression of his face as he was speaking reminded her of him.
she did not believe her own eyes; still the smile vanished from her face
and a deep line of suffering appeared on her brow.

“i cannot hear what you are saying,” she called out, wrinkling her brow
and frowning more and more.

“i have come,” said nekhludoff. “yes, i am doing my duty--i am
confessing,” thought nekhludoff; and at this thought the tears came in
his eyes, and he felt a choking sensation in his throat, and holding on
with both hands to the net, he made efforts to keep from bursting into
tears.

“i say, why do you shove yourself in where you’re not wanted?” some one
shouted at one side of him.

“god is my witness; i know nothing,” screamed a prisoner from the other
side.

noticing his excitement, maslova recognised him.

“you’re like . . . but no; i don’t know you,” she shouted, without
looking at him, and blushing, while her face grew still more stern.

“i have come to ask you to forgive me,” he said, in a loud but
monotonous voice, like a lesson learnt by heart. having said these words
he became confused; but immediately came the thought that, if he felt
ashamed, it was all the better; he had to bear this shame, and he
continued in a loud voice:

“forgive me; i have wronged you terribly.”

she stood motionless and without taking her squinting eyes off him.

he could not continue to speak, and stepping away from the net he tried
to suppress the sobs that were choking him.

the inspector, the same officer who had directed nekhludoff to the
women’s ward, and whose interest he seemed to have aroused, came into
the room, and, seeing nekhludoff not at the net, asked him why he was
not talking to her whom he wanted to see. nekhludoff blew his nose, gave
himself a shake, and, trying to appear calm, said:

“it’s so inconvenient through these nets; nothing can be heard.”

again the inspector considered for a moment.

“ah, well, she can be brought out here for awhile. mary karlovna,”
 turning to the warder, “lead maslova out.”

a minute later maslova came out of the side door. stepping softly, she
came up close to nekhludoff, stopped, and looked up at him from under
her brows. her black hair was arranged in ringlets over her forehead in
the same way as it had been two days ago; her face, though unhealthy and
puffy, was attractive, and looked perfectly calm, only the glittering
black eyes glanced strangely from under the swollen lids.

“you may talk here,” said the inspector, and shrugging his shoulders he
stepped aside with a look of surprise. nekhludoff moved towards a seat
by the wall.

maslova cast a questioning look at the inspector, and then, shrugging
her shoulders in surprise, followed nekhludoff to the bench, and having
arranged her skirt, sat down beside him.

“i know it is hard for you to forgive me,” he began, but stopped. his
tears were choking him. “but though i can’t undo the past, i shall now
do what is in my power. tell me--”

“how have you managed to find me?” she said, without answering his
question, neither looking away from him nor quite at him, with her
squinting eyes.

“o god, help me! teach me what to do,” nekhludoff thought, looking at
her changed face. “i was on the jury the day before yesterday,” he said.
“you did not recognise me?”

“no, i did not; there was not time for recognitions. i did not even
look,” she said.

“there was a child, was there not?” he asked.

“thank god! he died at once,” she answered, abruptly and viciously.

“what do you mean? why?”

“i was so ill myself, i nearly died,” she said, in the same quiet voice,
which nekhludoff had not expected and could not understand.

“how could my aunts have let you go?”

“who keeps a servant that has a baby? they sent me off as soon as
they noticed. but why speak of this? i remember nothing. that’s all
finished.”

“no, it is not finished; i wish to redeem my sin.”

“there’s nothing to redeem. what’s been has been and is passed,” she
said; and, what he never expected, she looked at him and smiled in an
unpleasantly luring, yet piteous, manner.

maslova never expected to see him again, and certainly not here and not
now; therefore, when she first recognised him, she could not keep back
the memories which she never wished to revive. in the first moment she
remembered dimly that new, wonderful world of feeling and of thought
which had been opened to her by the charming young man who loved her
and whom she loved, and then his incomprehensible cruelty and the whole
string of humiliations and suffering which flowed from and followed that
magic joy. this gave her pain, and, unable to understand it, she did
what she was always in the habit of doing, she got rid of these memories
by enveloping them in the mist of a depraved life. in the first moment,
she associated the man now sitting beside her with the lad she had
loved; but feeling that this gave her pain, she dissociated them again.
now, this well-dressed, carefully-got-up gentleman with perfumed beard
was no longer the nekhludoff whom she had loved but only one of the
people who made use of creatures like herself when they needed them,
and whom creatures like herself had to make use of in their turn as
profitably as they could; and that is why she looked at him with a
luring smile and considered silently how she could best make use of him.

“that’s all at an end,” she said. “now i’m condemned to siberia,” and
her lip trembled as she was saying this dreadful word.

“i knew; i was certain you were not guilty,” said nekhludoff.

“guilty! of course not; as if i could be a thief or a robber.” she
stopped, considering in what way she could best get something out of
him.

“they say here that all depends on the advocate,” she began. “a petition
should be handed in, only they say it’s expensive.”

“yes, most certainly,” said nekhludoff. “i have already spoken to an
advocate.”

“no money ought to be spared; it should be a good one,” she said.

“i shall do all that is possible.”

they were silent, and then she smiled again in the same way.

“and i should like to ask you . . . a little money if you can . . . not
much; ten roubles, i do not want more,” she said, suddenly.

“yes, yes,” nekhludoff said, with a sense of confusion, and felt for his
purse.

she looked rapidly at the inspector, who was walking up and down the
room. “don’t give it in front of him; he’d take it away.”

nekhludoff took out his purse as soon as the inspector had turned his
back; but had no time to hand her the note before the inspector faced
them again, so he crushed it up in his hand.

“this woman is dead,” nekhludoff thought, looking at this once sweet,
and now defiled, puffy face, lit up by an evil glitter in the black,
squinting eyes which were now glancing at the hand in which he held
the note, then following the inspector’s movements, and for a moment he
hesitated. the tempter that had been speaking to him in the night again
raised its voice, trying to lead him out of the realm of his inner into
the realm of his outer life, away from the question of what he should
do to the question of what the consequences would be, and what would be
practical.

“you can do nothing with this woman,” said the voice; “you will only
tie a stone round your neck, which will help to drown you and hinder you
from being useful to others.

“is it not better to give her all the money that is here, say good-bye,
and finish with her forever?” whispered the voice.

but here he felt that now, at this very moment, something most important
was taking place in his soul--that his inner life was, as it were,
wavering in the balance, so that the slightest effort would make it sink
to this side or the other. and he made this effort by calling to his
assistance that god whom he had felt in his soul the day before, and
that god instantly responded. he resolved to tell her everything now--at
once.

“katusha, i have come to ask you to forgive me, and you have given me no
answer. have you forgiven me? will you ever forgive me?” he asked.

she did not listen to him, but looked at his hand and at the inspector,
and when the latter turned she hastily stretched out her hand, grasped
the note, and hid it under her belt.

“that’s odd, what you are saying there,” she said, with a smile of
contempt, as it seemed to him.

nekhludoff felt that there was in her soul one who was his enemy and who
was protecting her, such as she was now, and preventing him from getting
at her heart. but, strange to say, this did not repel him, but drew him
nearer to her by some fresh, peculiar power. he knew that he must waken
her soul, that this was terribly difficult, but the very difficulty
attracted him. he now felt towards her as he had never felt towards her
or any one else before. there was nothing personal in this feeling: he
wanted nothing from her for himself, but only wished that she might not
remain as she now was, that she might awaken and become again what she
had been.

“katusha, why do you speak like that? i know you; i remember you--and
the old days in papovo.”

“what’s the use of recalling what’s past?” she remarked, drily.

“i am recalling it in order to put it right, to atone for my sin,
katusha,” and he was going to say that he would marry her, but,
meeting her eyes, he read in them something so dreadful, so coarse, so
repellent, that he could not go on.

at this moment the visitors began to go. the inspector came up to
nekhludoff and said that the time was up.

“good-bye; i have still much to say to you, but you see it is impossible
to do so now,” said nekhludoff, and held out his hand. “i shall come
again.”

“i think you have said all.”

she took his hand but did not press it.

“no; i shall try to see you again, somewhere where we can talk, and then
i shall tell you what i have to say-something very important.”

“well, then, come; why not?” she answered, and smiled with that
habitual, inviting, and promising smile which she gave to the men whom
she wished to please.

“you are more than a sister to me,” said nekhludoff.

“that’s odd,” she said again, and went behind the grating.



chapter xliv.

maslova’s view of life.

before the first interview, nekhludoff thought that when she saw him
and knew of his intention to serve her, katusha would be pleased and
touched, and would be katusha again; but, to his horror, he found
that katusha existed no more, and there was maslova in her place. this
astonished and horrified him.

what astonished him most was that katusha was not ashamed of her
position--not the position of a prisoner (she was ashamed of that), but
her position as a prostitute. she seemed satisfied, even proud of it.
and, yet, how could it be otherwise? everybody, in order to be able to
act, has to consider his occupation important and good. therefore, in
whatever position a person is, he is certain to form such a view of the
life of men in general which will make his occupation seem important and
good.

it is usually imagined that a thief, a murderer, a spy, a prostitute,
acknowledging his or her profession as evil, is ashamed of it. but the
contrary is true. people whom fate and their sin-mistakes have placed in
a certain position, however false that position may be, form a view of
life in general which makes their position seem good and admissible. in
order to keep up their view of life, these people instinctively keep to
the circle of those people who share their views of life and their own
place in it. this surprises us, where the persons concerned are thieves,
bragging about their dexterity, prostitutes vaunting their depravity, or
murderers boasting of their cruelty. this surprises us only because the
circle, the atmosphere in which these people live, is limited, and we
are outside it. but can we not observe the same phenomenon when the rich
boast of their wealth, i.e., robbery; the commanders in the army pride
themselves on victories, i.e., murder; and those in high places vaunt
their power, i.e., violence? we do not see the perversion in the views
of life held by these people, only because the circle formed by them is
more extensive, and we ourselves are moving inside of it.

and in this manner maslova had formed her views of life and of her own
position. she was a prostitute condemned to siberia, and yet she had a
conception of life which made it possible for her to be satisfied with
herself, and even to pride herself on her position before others.

according to this conception, the highest good for all men without
exception--old, young, schoolboys, generals, educated and uneducated,
was connected with the relation of the sexes; therefore, all men, even
when they pretended to be occupied with other things, in reality
took this view. she was an attractive woman, and therefore she was an
important and necessary person. the whole of her former and present life
was a confirmation of the correctness of this conception.

with such a view of life, she was by no means the lowest, but a very
important person. and maslova prized this view of life more than
anything; she could not but prize it, for, if she lost the importance
that such a view of life gave her among men, she would lose the meaning
of her life. and, in order not to lose the meaning of her life, she
instinctively clung to the set that looked at life in the same way as
she did. feeling that nekhludoff wanted to lead her out into another
world, she resisted him, foreseeing that she would have to lose her
place in life, with the self-possession and self-respect it gave her.
for this reason she drove from her the recollections of her early youth
and her first relations with nekhludoff. these recollections did not
correspond with her present conception of the world, and were therefore
quite rubbed out of her mind, or, rather, lay somewhere buried and
untouched, closed up and plastered over so that they should not escape,
as when bees, in order to protect the result of their labour, will
sometimes plaster a nest of worms. therefore, the present nekhludoff
was not the man she had once loved with a pure love, but only a rich
gentleman whom she could, and must, make use of, and with whom she could
only have the same relations as with men in general.

“no, i could not tell her the chief thing,” thought nekhludoff, moving
towards the front doors with the rest of the people. “i did not tell her
that i would marry her; i did not tell her so, but i will,” he thought.

the two warders at the door let out the visitors, counting them again,
and touching each one with their hands, so that no extra person should
go out, and none remain within. the slap on his shoulder did not offend
nekhludoff this time; he did not even notice it.



chapter xlv.

fanarin, the advocate--the petition.

nekhludoff meant to rearrange the whole of his external life, to let
his large house and move to an hotel, but agraphena petrovna pointed out
that it was useless to change anything before the winter. no one would
rent a town house for the summer; anyhow, he would have to live and keep
his things somewhere. and so all his efforts to change his manner
of life (he meant to live more simply: as the students live) led to
nothing. not only did everything remain as it was, but the house was
suddenly filled with new activity. all that was made of wool or fur was
taken out to be aired and beaten. the gate-keeper, the boy, the cook,
and corney himself took part in this activity. all sorts of strange
furs, which no one ever used, and various uniforms were taken out and
hung on a line, then the carpets and furniture were brought out, and the
gate-keeper and the boy rolled their sleeves up their muscular arms and
stood beating these things, keeping strict time, while the rooms were
filled with the smell of naphthaline.

when nekhludoff crossed the yard or looked out of the window and saw
all this going on, he was surprised at the great number of things there
were, all quite useless. their only use, nekhludoff thought, was the
providing of exercise for agraphena petrovna, corney, the gate-keeper,
the boy, and the cook.

“but it’s not worth while altering my manner of life now,” he thought,
“while maslova’s case is not decided. besides, it is too difficult. it
will alter of itself when she will be set free or exiled, and i follow
her.”

on the appointed day nekhludoff drove up to the advocate fanarin’s own
splendid house, which was decorated with huge palms and other plants,
and wonderful curtains, in fact, with all the expensive luxury
witnessing to the possession of much idle money, i.e., money acquired
without labour, which only those possess who grow rich suddenly. in
the waiting-room, just as in a doctor’s waiting-room, he found many
dejected-looking people sitting round several tables, on which lay
illustrated papers meant to amuse them, awaiting their turns to be
admitted to the advocate. the advocate’s assistant sat in the room at a
high desk, and having recognised nekhludoff, he came up to him and said
he would go and announce him at once. but the assistant had not reached
the door before it opened and the sounds of loud, animated voices were
heard; the voice of a middle-aged, sturdy merchant, with a red face and
thick moustaches, and the voice of fanarin himself. fanarin was also
a middle-aged man of medium height, with a worn look on his face. both
faces bore the expression which you see on the faces of those who have
just concluded a profitable but not quite honest transaction.

“your own fault, you know, my dear sir,” fanarin said, smiling.

“we’d all be in ‘eaven were it not for hour sins.”

“oh, yes, yes; we all know that,” and both laughed un-naturally.

“oh, prince nekhludoff! please to step in,” said fanarin, seeing him,
and, nodding once more to the merchant, he led nekhludoff into his
business cabinet, furnished in a severely correct style.

“won’t you smoke?” said the advocate, sitting down opposite nekhludoff
and trying to conceal a smile, apparently still excited by the success
of the accomplished transaction.

“thanks; i have come about maslova’s case.”

“yes, yes; directly! but oh, what rogues these fat money bags are!”
 he said. “you saw this here fellow. why, he has about twelve million
roubles, and he cannot speak correctly; and if he can get a twenty-five
rouble note out of you he’ll have it, if he’s to wrench it out with his
teeth.”

“he says ‘’eaven’ and ‘hour,’ and you say ‘this here fellow,’”
 nekhludoff thought, with an insurmountable feeling of aversion towards
this man who wished to show by his free and easy manner that he and
nekhludoff belonged to one and the same camp, while his other clients
belonged to another.

“he has worried me to death--a fearful scoundrel. i felt i must relieve
my feelings,” said the advocate, as if to excuse his speaking about
things that had no reference to business. “well, how about your case?
i have read it attentively, but do not approve of it. i mean that
greenhorn of an advocate has left no valid reason for an appeal.”

“well, then, what have you decided?”

“one moment. tell him,” he said to his assistant, who had just come in,
“that i keep to what i have said. if he can, it’s all right; if not, no
matter.”

“but he won’t agree.”

“well, no matter,” and the advocate frowned.

“there now, and it is said that we advocates get our money for nothing,”
 he remarked, after a pause. “i have freed one insolvent debtor from a
totally false charge, and now they all flock to me. yet every such case
costs enormous labour. why, don’t we, too, ‘lose bits of flesh in the
inkstand?’ as some writer or other has said. well, as to your case, or,
rather, the case you are taking an interest in. it has been conducted
abominably. there is no good reason for appealing. still,” he continued,
“we can but try to get the sentence revoked. this is what i have noted
down.” he took up several sheets of paper covered with writing, and
began to read rapidly, slurring over the uninteresting legal terms and
laying particular stress on some sentences. “to the court of appeal,
criminal department, etc., etc. according to the decisions, etc., the
verdict, etc., so-and-so maslova pronounced guilty of having caused the
death through poison of the merchant smelkoff, and has, according to
statute 1454 of the penal code, been sentenced to siberia,” etc., etc.
he stopped. evidently, in spite of his being so used to it, he still
felt pleasure in listening to his own productions. “this sentence is
the direct result of the most glaring judicial perversion and error,”
 he continued, impressively, “and there are grounds for its revocation.
firstly, the reading of the medical report of the examination of
smelkoff’s intestines was interrupted by the president at the very
beginning. this is point one.”

“but it was the prosecuting side that demanded this reading,” nekhludoff
said, with surprise.

“that does not matter. there might have been reasons for the defence to
demand this reading, too.”

“oh, but there could have been no reason whatever for that.”

“it is a ground for appeal, though. to continue: ‘secondly,’ he went
on reading, ‘when maslova’s advocate, in his speech for the defence,
wishing to characterise maslova’s personality, referred to the causes of
her fall, he was interrupted by the president calling him to order
for the alleged deviation from the direct subject. yet, as has been
repeatedly pointed out by the senate, the elucidation of the criminal’s
characteristics and his or her moral standpoint in general has a
significance of the first importance in criminal cases, even if only
as a guide in the settling of the question of imputation.’ that’s point
two,” he said, with a look at nekhludoff.

“but he spoke so badly that no one could make anything of it,”
 nekhludoff said, still more astonished.

“the fellow’s quite a fool, and of course could not be expected to say
anything sensible,” fanarin said, laughing; “but, all the same, it will
do as a reason for appeal. thirdly: ‘the president, in his summing up,
contrary to the direct decree of section 1, statute 801, of the criminal
code, omitted to inform the jury what the judicial points are that
constitute guilt; and did not mention that having admitted the fact of
maslova having administered the poison to smelkoff, the jury had a right
not to impute the guilt of murder to her, since the proofs of wilful
intent to deprive smelkoff of life were absent, and only to pronounce
her guilty of carelessness resulting in the death of the merchant, which
she did not desire.’ this is the chief point.”

“yes; but we ought to have known that ourselves. it was our mistake.”

“and now the fourth point,” the advocate continued. “the form of the
answer given by the jury contained an evident contradiction. maslova
is accused of wilfully poisoning smelkoff, her one object being that of
cupidity, the only motive to commit murder she could have had. the jury
in their verdict acquit her of the intent to rob, or participation in
the stealing of valuables, from which it follows that they intended
also to acquit her of the intent to murder, and only through a
misunderstanding, which arose from the incompleteness of the president’s
summing up, omitted to express it in due form in their answer. therefore
an answer of this kind by the jury absolutely demanded the application
of statutes 816 and 808 of the criminal code of procedure, i.e., an
explanation by the president to the jury of the mistake made by them,
and another debate on the question of the prisoner’s guilt.”

“then why did the president not do it?”

“i, too, should like to know why,” fanarin said, laughing.

“then the senate will, of course, correct this error?”

“that will all depend on who will preside there at the time. well, now,
there it is. i have further said,” he continued, rapidly, “a verdict of
this kind gave the court no right to condemn maslova to be punished as
a criminal, and to apply section 3, statute 771 of the penal code to her
case. this is a decided and gross violation of the basic principles of
our criminal law. in view of the reasons stated, i have the honour of
appealing to you, etc., etc., the refutation, according to 909, 910, and
section 2, 912 and 928 statute of the criminal code, etc., etc. . . .
to carry this case before another department of the same court for a
further examination. there; all that can be done is done, but, to be
frank, i have little hope of success, though, of course, it all depends
on what members will be present at the senate. if you have any influence
there you can but try.”

“i do know some.”

“all right; only be quick about it. else they’ll all go off for a change
of air; then you may have to wait three months before they return. then,
in case of failure, we have still the possibility of appealing to his
majesty. this, too, depends on the private influence you can bring to
work. in this case, too, i am at your service; i mean as to the working
of the petition, not the influence.”

“thank you. now as to your fees?”

“my assistant will hand you the petition and tell you.”

“one thing more. the procureur gave me a pass for visiting this person
in prison, but they tell me i must also get a permission from the
governor in order to get an interview at another time and in another
place than those appointed. is this necessary?”

“yes, i think so. but the governor is away at present; a vice-governor
is in his place. and he is such an impenetrable fool that you’ll
scarcely be able to do anything with him.”

“is it meslennikoff?”

“yes.”

“i know him,” said nekhludoff, and got up to go. at this moment a
horribly ugly, little, bony, snub-nosed, yellow-faced woman flew into
the room. it was the advocate’s wife, who did not seem to be in the
least bit troubled by her ugliness. she was attired in the most original
manner; she seemed enveloped in something made of velvet and silk,
something yellow and green, and her thin hair was crimped.

she stepped out triumphantly into the ante-room, followed by a tall,
smiling man, with a greenish complexion, dressed in a coat with silk
facings, and a white tie. this was an author. nekhludoff knew him by
sight.

she opened the cabinet door and said, “anatole, you must come to
me. here is simeon ivanovitch, who will read his poems, and you must
absolutely come and read about garshin.”

nekhludoff noticed that she whispered something to her husband, and,
thinking it was something concerning him, wished to go away, but she
caught him up and said: “i beg your pardon, prince, i know you, and,
thinking an introduction superfluous, i beg you to stay and take part
in our literary matinee. it will be most interesting. m. fanarin will
read.”

“you see what a lot i have to do,” said fanarin, spreading out his hands
and smilingly pointing to his wife, as if to show how impossible it was
to resist so charming a creature.

nekhludoff thanked the advocate’s wife with extreme politeness for the
honour she did him in inviting him, but refused the invitation with a
sad and solemn look, and left the room.

“what an affected fellow!” said the advocate’s wife, when he had gone
out.

in the ante-room the assistant handed him a ready-written petition,
and said that the fees, including the business with the senate and the
commission, would come to 1,000 roubles, and explained that m. fanarin
did not usually undertake this kind of business, but did it only to
oblige nekhludoff.

“and about this petition. who is to sign it?”

“the prisoner may do it herself, or if this is inconvenient, m. fanarin
can, if he gets a power of attorney from her.”

“oh, no. i shall take the petition to her and get her to sign it,” said
nekhludoff, glad of the opportunity of seeing her before the appointed
day.



chapter xlvi.

a prison flogging.

at the usual time the jailer’s whistle sounded in the corridors of the
prison, the iron doors of the cells rattled, bare feet pattered, heels
clattered, and the prisoners who acted as scavengers passed along the
corridors, filling the air with disgusting smells. the prisoners washed,
dressed, and came out for revision, then went to get boiling water for
their tea.

the conversation at breakfast in all the cells was very lively. it was
all about two prisoners who were to be flogged that day. one, vasiliev,
was a young man of some education, a clerk, who had killed his mistress
in a fit of jealousy. his fellow-prisoners liked him because he
was merry and generous and firm in his behaviour with the prison
authorities. he knew the laws and insisted on their being carried out.
therefore he was disliked by the authorities. three weeks before a
jailer struck one of the scavengers who had spilt some soup over his new
uniform. vasiliev took the part of the scavenger, saying that it was not
lawful to strike a prisoner.

“i’ll teach you the law,” said the jailer, and gave vasiliev a scolding.
vasiliev replied in like manner, and the jailer was going to hit him,
but vasiliev seized the jailer’s hands, held them fast for about three
minutes, and, after giving the hands a twist, pushed the jailer out of
the door. the jailer complained to the inspector, who ordered vasiliev
to be put into a solitary cell.

the solitary cells were a row of dark closets, locked from outside, and
there were neither beds, nor chairs, nor tables in them, so that the
inmates had to sit or lie on the dirty floor, while the rats, of which
there were a great many in those cells, ran across them. the rats were
so bold that they stole the bread from the prisoners, and even attacked
them if they stopped moving. vasiliev said he would not go into the
solitary cell, because he had not done anything wrong; but they used
force. then he began struggling, and two other prisoners helped him to
free himself from the jailers. all the jailers assembled, and among them
was petrov, who was distinguished for his strength. the prisoners got
thrown down and pushed into the solitary cells.

the governor was immediately informed that something very like a
rebellion had taken place. and he sent back an order to flog the two
chief offenders, vasiliev and the tramp, nepomnishy, giving each thirty
strokes with a birch rod. the flogging was appointed to take place in
the women’s interviewing-room.

all this was known in the prison since the evening, and it was being
talked about with animation in all the cells.

korableva, khoroshevka, theodosia, and maslova sat together in their
corner, drinking tea, all of them flushed and animated by the vodka they
had drunk, for maslova, who now had a constant supply of vodka, freely
treated her companions to it.

“he’s not been a-rioting, or anything,” korableva said, referring to
vasiliev, as she bit tiny pieces off a lump of sugar with her strong
teeth. “he only stuck up for a chum, because it’s not lawful to strike
prisoners nowadays.”

“and he’s a fine fellow, i’ve heard say,” said theodosia, who sat
bareheaded, with her long plaits round her head, on a log of wood
opposite the shelf bedstead on which the teapot stood.

“there, now, if you were to ask _him_,” the watchman’s wife said to
maslova (by him she meant nekhludoff).

“i shall tell him. he’ll do anything for me,” maslova said, tossing her
head, and smiling.

“yes, but when is he coming? and they’ve already gone to fetch them,”
 said theodosia. “it is terrible,” she added, with a sigh.

“i once did see how they flogged a peasant in the village.
father-in-law, he sent me once to the village elder. well, i went,
and there . . . “ the watchman’s wife began her long story, which was
interrupted by the sound of voices and steps in the corridor above them.

the women were silent, and sat listening.

“there they are, hauling him along, the devils!” khoroshavka said.
“they’ll do him to death, they will. the jailers are so enraged with him
because he never would give in to them.”

all was quiet again upstairs, and the watchman’s wife finished her story
of how she was that frightened when she went into the barn and saw
them flogging a peasant, her inside turned at the sight, and so on.
khoroshevka related how schegloff had been flogged, and never uttered
a sound. then theodosia put away the tea things, and korableva and the
watchman’s wife took up their sewing. maslova sat down on the bedstead,
with her arms round her knees, dull and depressed. she was about to lie
down and try to sleep, when the woman warder called her into the office
to see a visitor.

“now, mind, and don’t forget to tell him about us,” the old woman
(menshova) said, while maslova was arranging the kerchief on her head
before the dim looking-glass. “we did not set fire to the house, but he
himself, the fiend, did it; his workman saw him do it, and will not damn
his soul by denying it. you just tell to ask to see my mitri. mitri
will tell him all about it, as plain as can be. just think of our being
locked up in prison when we never dreamt of any ill, while he, the
fiend, is enjoying himself at the pub, with another man’s wife.”

“that’s not the law,” remarked korableva.

“i’ll tell him--i’ll tell him,” answered maslova. “suppose i have
another drop, just to keep up courage,” she added, with a wink; and
korableva poured out half a cup of vodka, which maslova drank. then,
having wiped her mouth and repeating the words “just to keep up
courage,” tossing her head and smiling gaily, she followed the warder
along the corridor.



chapter xlvii.

nekhludoff again visits maslova.

nekhludoff had to wait in the hall for a long time. when he had arrived
at the prison and rung at the entrance door, he handed the permission of
the procureur to the jailer on duty who met him.

“no, no,” the jailer on duty said hurriedly, “the inspector is engaged.”

“in the office?” asked nekhludoff.

“no, here in the interviewing-room.”.

“why, is it a visiting day to-day?”

“no; it’s special business.”

“i should like to see him. what am i to do?” said nekhludoff.

“when the inspector comes out you’ll tell him--wait a bit,” said the
jailer.

at this moment a sergeant-major, with a smooth, shiny face and
moustaches impregnated with tobacco smoke, came out of a side door, with
the gold cords of his uniform glistening, and addressed the jailer in a
severe tone.

“what do you mean by letting any one in here? the office. . . .”

“i was told the inspector was here,” said nekhludoff, surprised at the
agitation he noticed in the sergeant-major’s manner.

at this moment the inner door opened, and petrov came out, heated and
perspiring.

“he’ll remember it,” he muttered, turning to the sergeant major. the
latter pointed at nekhludoff by a look, and petrov knitted his brows and
went out through a door at the back.

“who will remember it? why do they all seem so confused? why did the
sergeant-major make a sign to him?” nekhludoff thought.

the sergeant-major, again addressing nekhludoff, said: “you cannot meet
here; please step across to the office.” and nekhludoff was about to
comply when the inspector came out of the door at the back, looking even
more confused than his subordinates, and sighing continually. when he
saw nekhludoff he turned to the jailer.

“fedotoff, have maslova, cell 5, women’s ward, taken to the office.”

“will you come this way, please,” he said, turning to nekhludoff. they
ascended a steep staircase and entered a little room with one window, a
writing-table, and a few chairs in it. the inspector sat down.

“mine are heavy, heavy duties,” he remarked, again addressing
nekhludoff, and took out a cigarette.

“you are tired, evidently,” said nekhludoff.

“tired of the whole of the service--the duties are very trying. one
tries to lighten their lot and only makes it worse; my only thought is
how to get away. heavy, heavy duties!”

nekhludoff did not know what the inspector’s particular difficulties
were, but he saw that to-day he was in a peculiarly dejected and
hopeless condition, calling for pity.

“yes, i should think the duties were heavy for a kind-hearted man,” he
said. “why do you serve in this capacity?”

“i have a family.”

“but, if it is so hard--”

“well, still you know it is possible to be of use in some measure; i
soften down all i can. another in my place would conduct the affairs
quite differently. why, we have more than 2,000 persons here. and what
persons! one must know how to manage them. it is easier said than done,
you know. after all, they are also men; one cannot help pitying them.”
 the inspector began telling nekhludoff of a fight that had lately taken
place among the convicts, which had ended by one man being killed.

the story was interrupted by the entrance of maslova, who was
accompanied by a jailer.

nekhludoff saw her through the doorway before she had noticed the
inspector. she was following the warder briskly, smiling and tossing her
head. when she saw the inspector she suddenly changed, and gazed at
him with a frightened look; but, quickly recovering, she addressed
nekhludoff boldly and gaily.

“how d’you do?” she said, drawling out her words, and smilingly took his
hand and shook it vigorously, not like the first time.

“here, i’ve brought you a petition to sign,” said nekhludoff, rather
surprised by the boldness with which she greeted him to-day.

“the advocate has written out a petition which you will have to sign,
and then we shall send it to petersburg.”

“all right! that can be done. anything you like,” she said, with a wink
and a smile.

and nekhludoff drew a folded paper from his pocket and went up to the
table.

“may she sign it here?” asked nekhludoff, turning to the inspector.

“it’s all right, it’s all right! sit down. here’s a pen; you can write?”
 said the inspector.

“i could at one time,” she said; and, after arranging her skirt and the
sleeves of her jacket, she sat down at the table, smiled awkwardly, took
the pen with her small, energetic hand, and glanced at nekhludoff with a
laugh.

nekhludoff told her what to write and pointed out the place where to
sign.

sighing deeply as she dipped her pen into the ink, and carefully shaking
some drops off the pen, she wrote her name.

“is it all?” she asked, looking from nekhludoff to the inspector, and
putting the pen now on the inkstand, now on the papers.

“i have a few words to tell you,” nekhludoff said, taking the pen from
her.

“all right; tell me,” she said. and suddenly, as if remembering
something, or feeling sleepy, she grew serious.

the inspector rose and left the room, and nekhludoff remained with her.



chapter xlviii.

maslova refuses to marry.

the jailer who had brought maslova in sat on a windowsill at some
distance from them.

the decisive moment had come for nekhludoff. he had been incessantly
blaming himself for not having told her the principal thing at the first
interview, and was now determined to tell her that he would marry her.
she was sitting at the further side of the table. nekhludoff sat down
opposite her. it was light in the room, and nekhludoff for the first
time saw her face quite near. he distinctly saw the crowsfeet round her
eyes, the wrinkles round her mouth, and the swollen eyelids. he felt
more sorry than before. leaning over the table so as not to be heard by
the jailer--a man of jewish type with grizzly whiskers, who sat by the
window--nekhludoff said:

“should this petition come to nothing we shall appeal to the emperor.
all that is possible shall be done.”

“there, now, if we had had a proper advocate from the first,” she
interrupted. “my defendant was quite a silly. he did nothing but pay me
compliments,” she said, and laughed. “if it had then been known that i
was acquainted with you, it would have been another matter. they think
every one’s a thief.”

“how strange she is to-day,” nekhludoff thought, and was just going to
say what he had on his mind when she began again:

“there’s something i want to say. we have here an old woman; such a fine
one, d’you know, she just surprises every one; she is imprisoned for
nothing, and her son, too, and everybody knows they are innocent, though
they are accused of having set fire to a house. d’you know, hearing i
was acquainted with you, she says: ‘tell him to ask to see my son; he’ll
tell him all about it.”’ thus spoke maslova, turning her head from side
to side, and glancing at nekhludoff. “their name’s menshoff. well, will
you do it? such a fine old thing, you know; you can see at once she’s
innocent. you’ll do it, there’s a dear,” and she smiled, glanced up at
him, and then cast down her eyes.

“all right. i’ll find out about them,” nekhludoff said, more and more
astonished by her free-and-easy manner. “but i was going to speak to you
about myself. do you remember what i told you last time?”

“you said a lot last time. what was it you told me?” she said,
continuing to smile and to turn her head from side to side.

“i said i had come to ask you to forgive me,” he began.

“what’s the use of that? forgive, forgive, where’s the good of--”

“to atone for my sin, not by mere words, but in deed. i have made up my
mind to marry you.”

an expression of fear suddenly came over her face. her squinting eyes
remained fixed on him, and yet seemed not to be looking at him.

“what’s that for?” she said, with an angry frown.

“i feel that it is my duty before god to do it.”

“what god have you found now? you are not saying what you ought to. god,
indeed! what god? you ought to have remembered god then,” she said, and
stopped with her mouth open. it was only now that nekhludoff noticed
that her breath smelled of spirits, and that he understood the cause of
her excitement.

“try and be calm,” he said.

“why should i be calm?” she began, quickly, flushing scarlet. “i am a
convict, and you are a gentleman and a prince. there’s no need for you
to soil yourself by touching me. you go to your princesses; my price is
a ten-rouble note.”

“however cruelly you may speak, you cannot express what i myself am
feeling,” he said, trembling all over; “you cannot imagine to what
extent i feel myself guilty towards you.”

“feel yourself guilty?” she said, angrily mimicking him. “you did not
feel so then, but threw me 100 roubles. that’s your price.”

“i know, i know; but what is to be done now?” said nekhludoff. “i have
decided not to leave you, and what i have said i shall do.”

“and i say you sha’n’t,” she said, and laughed aloud.

“katusha,” he said, touching her hand.

“you go away. i am a convict and you a prince, and you’ve no business
here,” she cried, pulling away her hand, her whole appearance
transformed by her wrath. “you’ve got pleasure out of me in this life,
and want to save yourself through me in the life to come. you are
disgusting to me--your spectacles and the whole of your dirty fat mug.
go, go!” she screamed, starting to her feet.

the jailer came up to them.

“what are you kicking up this row for?’ that won’t--”

“let her alone, please,” said nekhludoff.

“she must not forget herself,” said the jailer. “please wait a little,”
 said nekhludoff, and the jailer returned to the window.

maslova sat down again, dropping her eyes and firmly clasping her small
hands.

nekhludoff stooped over her, not knowing what to do.

“you do not believe me?” he said.

“that you mean to marry me? it will never be. i’ll rather hang myself.
so there!”

“well, still i shall go on serving you.”

“that’s your affair, only i don’t want anything from you. i am telling
you the plain truth,” she said. “oh, why did i not die then?” she added,
and began to cry piteously.

nekhludoff could not speak; her tears infected him.

she lifted her eyes, looked at him in surprise, and began to wipe her
tears with her kerchief.

the jailer came up again and reminded them that it was time to part.

maslova rose.

“you are excited. if it is possible, i shall come again tomorrow; you
think it over,” said nekhludoff.

she gave him no answer and, without looking up, followed the jailer out
of the room.

“well, lass, you’ll have rare times now,” korableva said, when maslova
returned to the cell. “seems he’s mighty sweet on you; make the most
of it while he’s after you. he’ll help you out. rich people can do
anything.”

“yes, that’s so,” remarked the watchman’s wife, with her musical voice.
“when a poor man thinks of getting married, there’s many a slip ‘twixt
the cup and the lip; but a rich man need only make up his mind and it’s
done. we knew a toff like that duckie. what d’you think he did?”

“well, have you spoken about my affairs?” the old woman asked.

but maslova gave her fellow-prisoners no answer; she lay down on the
shelf bedstead, her squinting eyes fixed on a corner of the room, and
lay there until the evening.

a painful struggle went on in her soul. what nekhludoff had told her
called up the memory of that world in which she had suffered and which
she had left without having understood, hating it. she now feared to
wake from the trance in which she was living. not having arrived at any
conclusion when evening came, she again bought some vodka and drank with
her companions.



chapter xlix.

vera doukhova.

“so this is what it means, this,” thought nekhludoff as he left the
prison, only now fully understanding his crime. if he had not tried to
expiate his guilt he would never have found out how great his crime was.
nor was this all; she, too, would never have felt the whole horror of
what had been done to her. he only now saw what he had done to the soul
of this woman; only now she saw and understood what had been done to
her.

up to this time nekhludoff had played with a sensation of
self-admiration, had admired his own remorse; now he was simply filled
with horror. he knew he could not throw her up now, and yet he could not
imagine what would come of their relations to one another.

just as he was going out, a jailer, with a disagreeable, insinuating
countenance, and a cross and medals on his breast, came up and handed
him a note with an air of mystery.

“here is a note from a certain person, your honour,” he said to
nekhludoff as he gave him the envelope.

“what person?”

“you will know when you read it. a political prisoner. i am in that
ward, so she asked me; and though it is against the rules, still
feelings of humanity--” the jailer spoke in an unnatural manner.

nekhludoff was surprised that a jailer of the ward where political
prisoners were kept should pass notes inside the very prison walls, and
almost within sight of every one; he did not then know that this was
both a jailer and a spy. however, he took the note and read it on coming
out of the prison.

the note was written in a bold hand, and ran as follows: “having heard
that you visit the prison, and are interested in the case of a criminal
prisoner, the desire of seeing you arose in me. ask for a permission
to see me. i can give you a good deal of information concerning your
protegee, and also our group.--yours gratefully, vera doukhova.”

vera doukhova had been a school-teacher in an out-of-the-way village of
the novgorod government, where nekhludoff and some friends of his had
once put up while bear hunting. nekhludoff gladly and vividly recalled
those old days, and his acquaintance with doukhova. it was just before
lent, in an isolated spot, 40 miles from the railway. the hunt had
been successful; two bears had been killed; and the company were having
dinner before starting on their return journey, when the master of the
hut where they were putting up came in to say that the deacon’s daughter
wanted to speak to prince nekhludoff. “is she pretty?” some one asked.
“none of that, please,” nekhludoff said, and rose with a serious look
on his face. wiping his mouth, and wondering what the deacon’s daughter
might want of him, he went into the host’s private hut.

there he found a girl with a felt hat and a warm cloak on--a sinewy,
ugly girl; only her eyes with their arched brows were beautiful.

“here, miss, speak to him,” said the old housewife; “this is the prince
himself. i shall go out meanwhile.”

“in what way can i be of service to you?” nekhludoff asked.

“i--i--i see you are throwing away your money on such nonsense--on
hunting,” began the girl, in great confusion. “i know--i only want one
thing--to be of use to the people, and i can do nothing because i know
nothing--” her eyes were so truthful, so kind, and her expression of
resoluteness and yet bashfulness was so touching, that nekhludoff, as
it often happened to him, suddenly felt as if he were in her position,
understood, and sympathised.

“what can i do, then?”

“i am a teacher, but should like to follow a course of study; and i
am not allowed to do so. that is, not that i am not allowed to; they’d
allow me to, but i have not got the means. give them to me, and when i
have finished the course i shall repay you. i am thinking the rich kill
bears and give the peasants drink; all this is bad. why should they not
do good? i only want 80 roubles. but if you don’t wish to, never mind,”
 she added, gravely.

“on the contrary, i am very grateful to you for this opportunity. . . .
i will bring it at once,” said nekhludoff.

he went out into the passage, and there met one of his comrades, who
had been overhearing his conversation. paying no heed to his chaffing,
nekhludoff got the money out of his bag and took it to her.

“oh, please, do not thank me; it is i who should thank you,” he said.

it was pleasant to remember all this now; pleasant to remember that
he had nearly had a quarrel with an officer who tried to make an
objectionable joke of it, and how another of his comrades had taken his
part, which led to a closer friendship between them. how successful the
whole of that hunting expedition had been, and how happy he had felt
when returning to the railway station that night. the line of sledges,
the horses in tandem, glide quickly along the narrow road that lies
through the forest, now between high trees, now between low firs weighed
down by the snow, caked in heavy lumps on their branches. a red light
flashes in the dark, some one lights an aromatic cigarette. joseph, a
bear driver, keeps running from sledge to sledge, up to his knees in
snow, and while putting things to rights he speaks about the elk which
are now going about on the deep snow and gnawing the bark off the aspen
trees, of the bears that are lying asleep in their deep hidden dens, and
his breath comes warm through the opening in the sledge cover. all this
came back to nekhludoff’s mind; but, above all, the joyous sense of
health, strength, and freedom from care: the lungs breathing in the
frosty air so deeply that the fur cloak is drawn tightly on his chest,
the fine snow drops off the low branches on to his face, his body
is warm, his face feels fresh, and his soul is free from care,
self-reproach, fear, or desire. how beautiful it was. and now, o god!
what torment, what trouble!

evidently vera doukhova was a revolutionist and imprisoned as such. he
must see her, especially as she promised to advise him how to lighten
maslova’s lot.



chapter l.

the vice-governor of the prison.

awaking early the next morning, nekhludoff remembered what he had done
the day before, and was seized with fear.

but in spite of this fear, he was more determined than ever to continue
what he had begun.

conscious of a sense of duty, he left the house and went to see
maslennikoff in order to obtain from him a permission to visit maslova
in prison, and also the menshoffs--mother and son--about whom maslova
had spoken to him. nekhludoff had known this maslennikoff a long time;
they had been in the regiment together. at that time maslennikoff was
treasurer to the regiment.

he was a kind-hearted and zealous officer, knowing and wishing to know
nothing beyond the regiment and the imperial family. now nekhludoff
saw him as an administrator, who had exchanged the regiment for an
administrative office in the government where he lived. he was married
to a rich and energetic woman, who had forced him to exchange military
for civil service. she laughed at him, and caressed him, as if he were
her own pet animal. nekhludoff had been to see them once during the
winter, but the couple were so uninteresting to him that he had not gone
again.

at the sight of nekhludoff maslennikoff’s face beamed all over. he had
the same fat red face, and was as corpulent and as well dressed as in
his military days. then, he used to be always dressed in a well-brushed
uniform, made according to the latest fashion, tightly fitting his chest
and shoulders; now, it was a civil service uniform he wore, and that,
too, tightly fitted his well-fed body and showed off his broad chest,
and was cut according to the latest fashion. in spite of the difference
in age (maslennikoff was 40), the two men were very familiar with one
another.

“halloo, old fellow! how good of you to come! let us go and see my wife.
i have just ten minutes to spare before the meeting. my chief is away,
you know. i am at the head of the government administration,” he said,
unable to disguise his satisfaction.

“i have come on business.”

“what is it?” said maslennikoff, in an anxious and severe tone, putting
himself at once on his guard.

“there is a person, whom i am very much interested in, in prison” (at
the word “prison” maslennikoff’s face grew stern); “and i should like to
have an interview in the office, and not in the common visiting-room. i
have been told it depended on you.”

“certainly, mon cher,” said maslennikoff, putting both hands on
nekhludoff’s knees, as if to tone down his grandeur; “but remember, i am
monarch only for an hour.”

“then will you give me an order that will enable me to see her?”

“it’s a woman?”

“yes.”

“what is she there for?”

“poisoning, but she has been unjustly condemned.”

“yes, there you have it, your justice administered by jury, ils n’en
font point d’autres,” he said, for some unknown reason, in french. “i
know you do not agree with me, but it can’t be helped, c’est mon opinion
bien arretee,” he added, giving utterance to an opinion he had for the
last twelve months been reading in the retrograde conservative paper. “i
know you are a liberal.”

“i don’t know whether i am a liberal or something else,” nekhludoff
said, smiling; it always surprised him to find himself ranked with a
political party and called a liberal, when he maintained that a man
should be heard before he was judged, that before being tried all men
were equal, that nobody at all ought to be ill-treated and beaten, but
especially those who had not yet been condemned by law. “i don’t know
whether i am a liberal or not; but i do know that however had the
present way of conducting a trial is, it is better than the old.”

“and whom have you for an advocate?”

“i have spoken to fanarin.”

“dear me, fanarin!” said meslennikoff, with a grimace, recollecting how
this fanarin had examined him as a witness at a trial the year before
and had, in the politest manner, held him up to ridicule for half an
hour.

“i should not advise you to have anything to do with him. _fanarin est
un homme tare_.”

“i have one more request to make,” said nekhludoff, without answering
him. “there’s a girl whom i knew long ago, a teacher; she is a very
pitiable little thing, and is now also imprisoned, and would like to see
me. could you give me a permission to visit her?”

meslennikoff bent his head on one side and considered.

“she’s a political one?”

“yes, i have been told so.”

“well, you see, only relatives get permission to visit political
prisoners. still, i’ll give you an open order. _je sais que vous
n’abuserez pas_. what’s the name of your protegee? doukhova? _elle est
jolie?_”

“hideuse.”

maslennikoff shook his head disapprovingly, went up to the table, and
wrote on a sheet of paper, with a printed heading: “the bearer, prince
dmitri ivanovitch nekhludoff, is to be allowed to interview in the
prison office the meschanka maslova, and also the medical assistant,
doukhova,” and he finished with an elaborate flourish.

“now you’ll be able to see what order we have got there. and it is
very difficult to keep order, it is so crowded, especially with people
condemned to exile; but i watch strictly, and love the work. you will
see they are very comfortable and contented. but one must know
how to deal with them. only a few days ago we had a little
trouble--insubordination; another would have called it mutiny, and would
have made many miserable, but with us it all passed quietly. we must
have solicitude on one hand, firmness and power on the other,” and he
clenched the fat, white, turquoise-ringed fist, which issued out of
the starched cuff of his shirt sleeve, fastened with a gold stud.
“solicitude and firm power.”

“well, i don’t know about that,” said nekhludoff. “i went there twice,
and felt very much depressed.”

“do you know, you ought to get acquainted with the countess passek,”
 continued maslennikoff, growing talkative. “she has given herself up
entirely to this sort of work. elle fait beaucoup de bien. thanks to
her--and, perhaps i may add without false modesty, to me--everything has
been changed, changed in such a way that the former horrors no longer
exist, and they are really quite comfortable there. well, you’ll see.
there’s fanarin. i do not know him personally; besides, my social
position keeps our ways apart; but he is positively a bad man, and
besides, he takes the liberty of saying such things in the court--such
things!”

“well, thank you,” nekhludoff said, taking the paper, and without
listening further he bade good-day to his former comrade.

“and won’t you go in to see my wife?”

“no, pray excuse me; i have no time now.”

“dear me, why she will never forgive me,” said maslennikoff,
accompanying his old acquaintance down to the first landing, as he was
in the habit of doing to persons of not the greatest, but the second
greatest importance, with whom he classed nekhludoff; “now do go in, if
only for a moment.”

but nekhludoff remained firm; and while the footman and the door-keeper
rushed to give him his stick and overcoat, and opened the door, outside
of which there stood a policeman, nekhludoff repeated that he really
could not come in.

“well, then; on thursday, please. it is her ‘at-home.’ i will tell her
you will come,” shouted maslennikoff from the stairs.



chapter li.

the cells.

nekhludoff drove that day straight from maslennikoff’s to the prison,
and went to the inspector’s lodging, which he now knew. he was again
struck by the sounds of the same piano of inferior quality; but this
time it was not a rhapsody that was being played, but exercises by
clementi, again with the same vigour, distinctness, and quickness. the
servant with the bandaged eye said the inspector was in, and showed
nekhludoff to a small drawing-room, in which there stood a sofa and,
in front of it, a table, with a large lamp, which stood on a piece of
crochet work, and the paper shade of which was burnt on one side. the
chief inspector entered, with his usual sad and weary look.

“take a seat, please. what is it you want?” he said, buttoning up the
middle button of his uniform.

“i have just been to the vice-governor’s, and got this order from him. i
should like to see the prisoner maslova.”

“markova?” asked the inspector, unable to bear distinctly because of the
music.

“maslova!”

“well, yes.” the inspector got up and went to the door whence proceeded
clementi’s roulades.

“mary, can’t you stop just a minute?” he said, in a voice that showed
that this music was the bane of his life. “one can’t hear a word.”

the piano was silent, but one could hear the sound of reluctant steps,
and some one looked in at the door.

the inspector seemed to feel eased by the interval of silence, lit a
thick cigarette of weak tobacco, and offered one to nekhludoff.

nekhludoff refused.

“what i want is to see maslova.”

“oh, yes, that can be managed. now, then, what do you want?” he said,
addressing a little girl of five or six, who came into the room and
walked up to her father with her head turned towards nekhludoff, and her
eyes fixed on him.

“there, now, you’ll fall down,” said the inspector, smiling, as the
little girl ran up to him, and, not looking where she was going, caught
her foot in a little rug.

“well, then, if i may, i shall go.”

“it’s not very convenient to see maslova to-day,” said the inspector.

“how’s that?”

“well, you know, it’s all your own fault,” said the inspector, with a
slight smile. “prince, give her no money into her hands. if you like,
give it me. i will keep it for her. you see, you gave her some money
yesterday; she got some spirits (it’s an evil we cannot manage to root
out), and to-day she is quite tipsy, even violent.”

“can this be true?”

“oh, yes, it is. i have even been obliged to have recourse to severe
measures, and to put her into a separate cell. she is a quiet woman in
an ordinary way. but please do not give her any money. these people are
so--” what had happened the day before came vividly back to nekhludoff’s
mind, and again he was seized with fear.

“and doukhova, a political prisoner; might i see her?”

“yes, if you like,” said the inspector. he embraced the little girl,
who was still looking at nekhludoff, got up, and, tenderly motioning
her aside, went into the ante-room. hardly had he got into the overcoat
which the maid helped him to put on, and before he had reached the door,
the distinct sounds of clementi’s roulades again began.

“she entered the conservatoire, but there is such disorder there. she
has a great gift,” said the inspector, as they went down the stairs.
“she means to play at concerts.”

the inspector and nekhludoff arrived at the prison. the gates were
instantly opened as they appeared. the jailers, with their fingers
lifted to their caps, followed the inspector with their eyes. four
men, with their heads half shaved, who were carrying tubs filled with
something, cringed when they saw the inspector. one of them frowned
angrily, his black eyes glaring.

“of course a talent like that must be developed; it would not do to bury
it, but in a small lodging, you know, it is rather hard.” the inspector
went on with the conversation, taking no notice of the prisoners.

“who is it you want to see?”

“doukhova.”

“oh, she’s in the tower. you’ll have to wait a little,” he said.

“might i not meanwhile see the prisoners menshoff, mother and son, who
are accused of incendiarism?”

“oh, yes. cell no. 21. yes, they can be sent for.”

“but might i not see menshoff in his cell?”

“oh, you’ll find the waiting-room more pleasant.”

“no. i should prefer the cell. it is more interesting.”

“well, you have found something to be interested in!”

here the assistant, a smartly-dressed officer, entered the side door.

“here, see the prince into menshoff’s cell, no. 21,” said the inspector
to his assistant, “and then take him to the office. and i’ll go and
call--what’s her name? vera doukhova.”

the inspector’s assistant was young, with dyed moustaches, and diffusing
the smell of eau-de-cologne. “this way, please,” he said to nekhludoff,
with a pleasant smile. “our establishment interests you?”

“yes, it does interest me; and, besides, i look upon it as a duty to
help a man who i heard was confined here, though innocent.”

the assistant shrugged his shoulders.

“yes, that may happen,” he said quietly, politely stepping aside to let
the visitor enter, the stinking corridor first. “but it also happens
that they lie. here we are.”

the doors of the cells were open, and some of the prisoners were in the
corridor. the assistant nodded slightly to the jailers, and cast a side
glance at the prisoners, who, keeping close to the wall, crept back to
their cells, or stood like soldiers, with their arms at their sides,
following the official with their eyes. after passing through one
corridor, the assistant showed nekhludoff into another to the left,
separated from the first by an iron door. this corridor was darker, and
smelt even worse than the first. the corridor had doors on both sides,
with little holes in them about an inch in diameter. there was only an
old jailer, with an unpleasant face, in this corridor.

“where is menshoff?” asked the inspector’s assistant.

“the eighth cell to the left.”

“and these? are they occupied?” asked nekhludoff.

“yes, all but one.”



chapter lii.

no. 21.

“may i look in?” asked nekhludoff.

“oh, certainly,” answered the assistant, smiling, and turned to the
jailer with some question.

nekhludoff looked into one of the little holes, and saw a tall young man
pacing up and down the cell. when the man heard some one at the door he
looked up with a frown, but continued walking up and down.

nekhludoff looked into another hole. his eye met another large eye
looking out of the hole at him, and he quickly stepped aside. in the
third cell he saw a very small man asleep on the bed, covered, head and
all, with his prison cloak. in the fourth a broad-faced man was sitting
with his elbows on his knees and his head low down. at the sound of
footsteps this man raised his head and looked up. his face, especially
his large eyes, bore the expression of hopeless dejection. one could see
that it did not even interest him to know who was looking into his
cell. whoever it might be, he evidently hoped for nothing good from him.
nekhludoff was seized with dread, and went to menshoff’s cell, no. 21,
without stopping to look through any more holes. the jailer unlocked the
door and opened it. a young man, with long neck, well-developed muscles,
a small head, and kind, round eyes, stood by the bed, hastily putting
on his cloak, and looking at the newcomers with a frightened face.
nekhludoff was specially struck by the kind, round eyes that were
throwing frightened and inquiring glances in turns at him, at the
jailer, and at the assistant, and back again.

“here’s a gentleman wants to inquire into your affair.”

“thank you kindly.”

“yes, i was told about you,” nekhludoff said, going through the cell up
to the dirty grated window, “and i should like to hear all about it from
yourself.”

menshoff also came up to the window, and at once started telling his
story, at first looking shyly at the inspector’s assistant, but growing
gradually bolder. when the assistant left the cell and went into the
corridor to give some order the man grew quite bold. the story was told
with the accent and in the manner common to a most ordinary good peasant
lad. to hear it told by a prisoner dressed in this degrading clothing,
and inside a prison, seemed very strange to nekhludoff. nekhludoff
listened, and at the same time kept looking around him--at the low
bedstead with its straw mattress, the window and the dirty, damp wall,
and the piteous face and form of this unfortunate, disfigured peasant
in his prison cloak and shoes, and he felt sadder and sadder, and would
have liked not to believe what this good-natured fellow was saying. it
seemed too dreadful to think that men could do such a thing as to take
a man, dress him in convict clothes, and put him in this horrible place
without any reason only because he himself had been injured. and yet the
thought that this seemingly true story, told with such a good-natured
expression on the face, might be an invention and a lie was still
more dreadful. this was the story: the village public-house keeper had
enticed the young fellow’s wife. he tried to get justice by all sorts
of means. but everywhere the public-house keeper managed to bribe the
officials, and was acquitted. once, he took his wife back by force, but
she ran away next day. then he came to demand her back, but, though he
saw her when he came in, the public-house keeper told him she was not
there, and ordered him to go away. he would not go, so the public-house
keeper and his servant beat him so that they drew blood. the next day
a fire broke out in the public-house, and the young man and his mother
were accused of having set the house on fire. he had not set it on fire,
but was visiting a friend at the time.

“and it is true that you did not set it on fire?”

“it never entered my head to do it, sir. it must be my enemy that did
it himself. they say he had only just insured it. then they said it was
mother and i that did it, and that we had threatened him. it is true i
once did go for him, my heart couldn’t stand it any longer.”

“can this be true?”

“god is my witness it is true. oh, sir, be so good--” and nekhludoff had
some difficulty to prevent him from bowing down to the ground. “you see
i am perishing without any reason.” his face quivered and he turned
up the sleeve of his cloak and began to cry, wiping the tears with the
sleeve of his dirty shirt.

“are you ready?” asked the assistant.

“yes. well, cheer up. we will consult a good lawyer, and will do what we
can,” said nekhludoff, and went out. menshoff stood close to the door,
so that the jailer knocked him in shutting it, and while the jailer was
locking it he remained looking out through the little hole.



chapter liii.

victims of government.

passing back along the broad corridor (it was dinner time, and the cell
doors were open), among the men dressed in their light yellow cloaks,
short, wide trousers, and prison shoes, who were looking eagerly at him,
nekhludoff felt a strange mixture of sympathy for them, and horror and
perplexity at the conduct of those who put and kept them here, and,
besides, he felt, he knew not why, ashamed of himself calmly examining
it all.

in one of the corridors, some one ran, clattering with his shoes, in
at the door of a cell. several men came out from here, and stood in
nekhludoff’s way, bowing to him.

“please, your honour (we don’t know what to call you), get our affair
settled somehow.”

“i am not an official. i know nothing about it.”

“well, anyhow, you come from outside; tell somebody--one of the
authorities, if need be,” said an indignant voice. “show some pity
on us, as a human being. here we are suffering the second month for
nothing.”

“what do you mean? why?” said nekhludoff.

“why? we ourselves don’t know why, but are sitting here the second
month.”

“yes, it’s quite true, and it is owing to an accident,” said the
inspector. “these people were taken up because they had no passports,
and ought to have been sent back to their native government; but the
prison there is burnt, and the local authorities have written, asking us
not to send them on. so we have sent all the other passportless people
to their different governments, but are keeping these.”

“what! for no other reason than that?” nekhludoff exclaimed, stopping at
the door.

a crowd of about forty men, all dressed in prison clothes, surrounded
him and the assistant, and several began talking at once. the assistant
stopped them.

“let some one of you speak.”

a tall, good-looking peasant, a stone-mason, of about fifty, stepped out
from the rest. he told nekhludoff that all of them had been ordered back
to their homes and were now being kept in prison because they had no
passports, yet they had passports which were only a fortnight overdue.
the same thing had happened every year; they had many times omitted to
renew their passports till they were overdue, and nobody had ever said
anything; but this year they had been taken up and were being kept in
prison the second month, as if they were criminals.

“we are all masons, and belong to the same artel. we are told that the
prison in our government is burnt, but this is not our fault. do help
us.”

nekhludoff listened, but hardly understood what the good-looking old
man was saying, because his attention was riveted to a large, dark-grey,
many-legged louse that was creeping along the good-looking man’s cheek.

“how’s that? is it possible for such a reason?” nekhludoff said, turning
to the assistant.

“yes, they should have been sent off and taken back to their homes,”
 calmly said the assistant, “but they seem to have been forgotten or
something.”

before the assistant had finished, a small, nervous man, also in prison
dress, came out of the crowd, and, strangely contorting his mouth, began
to say that they were being ill-used for nothing.

“worse than dogs,” he began.

“now, now; not too much of this. hold your tongue, or you know--”

“what do i know?” screamed the little man, desperately. “what is our
crime?”

“silence!” shouted the assistant, and the little man was silent.

“but what is the meaning of all this?” nekhludoff thought to himself
as he came out of the cell, while a hundred eyes were fixed upon him
through the openings of the cell doors and from the prisoners that met
him, making him feel as if he were running the gauntlet.

“is it really possible that perfectly innocent people are kept here?”
 nekhludoff uttered when they left the corridor.

“what would you have us do? they lie so. to hear them talk they are all
of them innocent,” said the inspector’s assistant. “but it does happen
that some are really imprisoned for nothing.”

“well, these have done nothing.”

“yes, we must admit it. still, the people are fearfully spoilt. there
are such types--desperate fellows, with whom one has to look sharp.
to-day two of that sort had to be punished.”

“punished? how?”

“flogged with a birch-rod, by order.”

“but corporal punishment is abolished.”

“not for such as are deprived of their rights. they are still liable to
it.”

nekhludoff thought of what he had seen the day before while waiting
in the hall, and now understood that the punishment was then being
inflicted, and the mixed feeling of curiosity, depression, perplexity,
and moral nausea, that grew into physical sickness, took hold of him
more strongly than ever before.

without listening to the inspector’s assistant, or looking round, he
hurriedly left the corridor, and went to the office. the inspector was
in the office, occupied with other business, and had forgotten to send
for doukhova. he only remembered his promise to have her called when
nekhludoff entered the office.

“sit down, please. i’ll send for her at once,” said the inspector.



chapter liv.

prisoners and friends.

the office consisted of two rooms. the first room, with a large,
dilapidated stove and two dirty windows, had a black measure for
measuring the prisoners in one corner, and in another corner hung a
large image of christ, as is usual in places where they torture people.
in this room stood several jailers. in the next room sat about twenty
persons, men and women in groups and in pairs, talking in low voices.
there was a writing table by the window.

the inspector sat down by the table, and offered nekhludoff a chair
beside him. nekhludoff sat down, and looked at the people in the room.

the first who drew his attention was a young man with a pleasant face,
dressed in a short jacket, standing in front of a middle-aged woman
with dark eyebrows, and he was eagerly telling her something and
gesticulating with his hands. beside them sat an old man, with blue
spectacles, holding the hand of a young woman in prisoner’s clothes, who
was telling him something. a schoolboy, with a fixed, frightened look on
his face, was gazing at the old man. in one corner sat a pair of
lovers. she was quite young and pretty, and had short, fair hair, looked
energetic, and was elegantly dressed; he had fine features, wavy hair,
and wore a rubber jacket. they sat in their corner and seemed stupefied
with love. nearest to the table sat a grey-haired woman dressed in
black, evidently the mother of a young, consumptive-looking fellow, in
the same kind of jacket. her head lay on his shoulder. she was trying
to say something, but the tears prevented her from speaking; she began
several times, but had to stop. the young man held a paper in his hand,
and, apparently not knowing what to do, kept folding and pressing it
with an angry look on his face.

beside them was a short-haired, stout, rosy girl, with very prominent
eyes, dressed in a grey dress and a cape; she sat beside the weeping
mother, tenderly stroking her. everything about this girl was beautiful;
her large, white hands, her short, wavy hair, her firm nose and lips,
but the chief charm of her face lay in her kind, truthful hazel eyes.
the beautiful eyes turned away from the mother for a moment when
nekhludoff came in, and met his look. but she turned back at once and
said something to the mother.

not far from the lovers a dark, dishevelled man, with a gloomy face, sat
angrily talking to a beardless visitor, who looked as if he belonged to
the scoptsy sect.

at the very door stood a young man in a rubber jacket, who seemed more
concerned about the impression he produced on the onlooker than about
what he was saying. nekhludoff, sitting by the inspector’s side, looked
round with strained curiosity. a little boy with closely-cropped hair
came up to him and addressed him in a thin little voice.

“and whom are you waiting for?”

nekhludoff was surprised at the question, but looking at the boy, and
seeing the serious little face with its bright, attentive eyes fixed
on him, answered him seriously that he was waiting for a woman of his
acquaintance.

“is she, then, your sister?” the boy asked.

“no, not my sister,” nekhludoff answered in surprise.

“and with whom are you here?” he inquired of the boy.

“i? with mamma; she is a political one,” he replied.

“mary pavlovna, take kolia!” said the inspector, evidently considering
nekhludoff’s conversation with the boy illegal.

mary pavlovna, the beautiful girl who had attracted nekhludoff’s
attention, rose tall and erect, and with firm, almost manly steps,
approached nekhludoff and the boy.

“what is he asking you? who you are?” she inquired with a slight smile,
and looking straight into his face with a trustful look in her kind,
prominent eyes, and as simply as if there could be no doubt whatever
that she was and must be on sisterly terms with everybody.

“he likes to know everything,” she said, looking at the boy with so
sweet and kind a smile that both the boy and nekhludoff were obliged to
smile back.

“he was asking me whom i have come to see.”

“mary pavlovna, it is against the rules to speak to strangers. you know
it is,” said the inspector.

“all right, all right,” she said, and went back to the consumptive lad’s
mother, holding kolia’s little hand in her large, white one, while he
continued gazing up into her face.

“whose is this little boy?” nekhludoff asked of the inspector.

“his mother is a political prisoner, and he was born in prison,”
 said the inspector, in a pleased tone, as if glad to point out how
exceptional his establishment was.

“is it possible?”

“yes, and now he is going to siberia with her.”

“and that young girl?”

“i cannot answer your question,” said the inspector, shrugging his
shoulders. “besides, here is doukhova.”



chapter lv.

vera doukhova explains.

through a door, at the back of the room, entered, with a wriggling gait,
the thin, yellow vera doukhova, with her large, kind eyes.

“thanks for having come,” she said, pressing nekhludoff’s hand. “do you
remember me? let us sit down.”

“i did not expect to see you like this.”

“oh, i am very happy. it is so delightful, so delightful, that i desire
nothing better,” said vera doukhova, with the usual expression of fright
in the large, kind, round eyes fixed on nekhludoff, and twisting the
terribly thin, sinewy neck, surrounded by the shabby, crumpled, dirty
collar of her bodice. nekhludoff asked her how she came to be in prison.

in answer she began relating all about her affairs with great animation.
her speech was intermingled with a great many long words, such as
propaganda, disorganisation, social groups, sections and sub-sections,
about which she seemed to think everybody knew, but which nekhludoff had
never heard of.

she told him all the secrets of the nardovolstvo, [literally, “people’s
freedom,” a revolutionary movement] evidently convinced that he was
pleased to hear them. nekhludoff looked at her miserable little neck,
her thin, unkempt hair, and wondered why she had been doing all these
strange things, and why she was now telling all this to him. he pitied
her, but not as he had pitied menshoff, the peasant, kept for no fault
of his own in the stinking prison. she was pitiable because of the
confusion that filled her mind. it was clear that she considered herself
a heroine, and was ready to give her life for a cause, though she could
hardly have explained what that cause was and in what its success would
lie.

the business that vera doukhova wanted to see nekhludoff about was
the following: a friend of hers, who had not even belonged to their
“sub-group,” as she expressed it, had been arrested with her about five
months before, and imprisoned in the petropavlovsky fortress because
some prohibited books and papers (which she had been asked to keep) had
been found in her possession. vera doukhova felt herself in some measure
to blame for her friend’s arrest, and implored nekhludoff, who had
connections among influential people, to do all he could in order to set
this friend free.

besides this, doukhova asked him to try and get permission for
another friend of hers, gourkevitch (who was also imprisoned in the
petropavlovsky fortress), to see his parents, and to procure some
scientific books which he required for his studies. nekhludoff promised
to do what he could when he went to petersburg.

as to her own story, this is what she said: having finished a course
of midwifery, she became connected with a group of adherents to the
nardovolstvo, and made up her mind to agitate in the revolutionary
movement. at first all went on smoothly. she wrote proclamations
and occupied herself with propaganda work in the factories; then, an
important member having been arrested, their papers were seized and all
concerned were arrested. “i was also arrested, and shall be exiled. but
what does it matter? i feel perfectly happy.” she concluded her story
with a piteous smile.

nekhludoff made some inquiries concerning the girl with the prominent
eyes. vera doukhova told him that this girl was the daughter of a
general, and had been long attached to the revolutionary party, and was
arrested because she had pleaded guilty to having shot a gendarme.
she lived in a house with some conspirators, where they had a secret
printing press. one night, when the police came to search this house,
the occupiers resolved to defend themselves, put out the light, and
began destroying the things that might incriminate them. the police
forced their way in, and one of the conspirators fired, and mortally
wounded a gendarme. when an inquiry was instituted, this girl said that
it was she who had fired, although she had never had a revolver in her
hands, and would not have hurt a fly. and she kept to it, and was now
condemned to penal servitude in siberia.

“an altruistic, fine character,” said vera doukhova, approvingly.

the third business that vera doukhova wanted to talk about concerned
maslova. she knew, as everybody does know in prison, the story of
maslova’s life and his connection with her, and advised him to take
steps to get her removed into the political prisoner’s ward, or into
the hospital to help to nurse the sick, of which there were very many at
that time, so that extra nurses were needed.

nekhludoff thanked her for the advice, and said he would try to act upon
it.



chapter lvi.

nekhludoff and the prisoners.

their conversation was interrupted by the inspector, who said that the
time was up, and the prisoners and their friends must part. nekhludoff
took leave of vera doukhova and went to the door, where he stopped to
watch what was going on.

the inspector’s order called forth only heightened animation among the
prisoners in the room, but no one seemed to think of going. some rose
and continued to talk standing, some went on talking without rising.
a few began crying and taking leave of each other. the mother and
her consumptive son seemed especially pathetic. the young fellow kept
twisting his bit of paper and his face seemed angry, so great were his
efforts not to be infected by his mother’s emotion. the mother, hearing
that it was time to part, put her head on his shoulder and sobbed and
sniffed aloud.

the girl with the prominent eyes--nekhludoff could not help watching
her--was standing opposite the sobbing mother, and was saying something
to her in a soothing tone. the old man with the blue spectacles stood
holding his daughter’s hand and nodding in answer to what she said. the
young lovers rose, and, holding each other’s hands, looked silently into
one another’s eyes.

“these are the only two who are merry,” said a young man with a short
coat who stood by nekhludoff’s side, also looking at those who were
about to part, and pointed to the lovers. feeling nekhludoff’s and
the young man’s eyes fixed on them, the lovers--the young man with the
rubber coat and the pretty girl--stretched out their arms, and with
their hands clasped in each other’s, danced round and round again.
“to-night they are going to be married here in prison, and she will
follow him to siberia,” said the young man.

“what is he?”

“a convict, condemned to penal servitude. let those two at least have a
little joy, or else it is too painful,” the young man added, listening
to the sobs of the consumptive lad’s mother.

“now, my good people! please, please do not oblige me to have recourse
to severe measures,” the inspector said, repeating the same words
several times over. “do, please,” he went on in a weak, hesitating
manner. “it is high time. what do you mean by it? this sort of thing is
quite impossible. i am now asking you for the last time,” he repeated
wearily, now putting out his cigarette and then lighting another.

it was evident that, artful, old, and common as were the devices
enabling men to do evil to others without feeling responsible for it,
the inspector could not but feel conscious that he was one of those who
were guilty of causing the sorrow which manifested itself in this
room. and it was apparent that this troubled him sorely. at length the
prisoners and their visitors began to go--the first out of the inner,
the latter out of the outer door. the man with the rubber jacket passed
out among them, and the consumptive youth and the dishevelled man. mary
pavlovna went out with the boy born in prison.

the visitors went out too. the old man with the blue spectacles,
stepping heavily, went out, followed by nekhludoff.

“yes, a strange state of things this,” said the talkative young man, as
if continuing an interrupted conversation, as he descended the stairs
side by side with nekhludoff. “yet we have reason to be grateful to the
inspector who does not keep strictly to the rules, kind-hearted fellow.
if they can get a talk it does relieve their hearts a bit, after all!”

while talking to the young man, who introduced himself as medinzeff,
nekhludoff reached the hall. there the inspector came up to them with
weary step.

“if you wish to see maslova,” he said, apparently desiring to be polite
to nekhludoff, “please come to-morrow.”

“very well,” answered nekhludoff, and hurried away, experiencing
more than ever that sensation of moral nausea which he always felt on
entering the prison.

the sufferings of the evidently innocent menshoff seemed terrible, and
not so much his physical suffering as the perplexity, the distrust in
the good and in god which he must feel, seeing the cruelty of the people
who tormented him without any reason.

terrible were the disgrace and sufferings cast on these hundreds of
guiltless people simply because something was not written on paper as it
should have been. terrible were the brutalised jailers, whose occupation
is to torment their brothers, and who were certain that they were
fulfilling an important and useful duty; but most terrible of all seemed
this sickly, elderly, kind-hearted inspector, who was obliged to part
mother and son, father and daughter, who were just the same sort of
people as he and his own children.

“what is it all for?” nekhludoff asked himself, and could not find an
answer.



chapter lvii.

the vice-governor’s “at-home”.

the next day nekhludoff went to see the advocate, and spoke to him
about the menshoffs’ case, begging him to undertake their defence. the
advocate promised to look into the case, and if it turned out to be as
nekhludoff said he would in all probability undertake the defence free
of charge. then nekhludoff told him of the 130 men who were kept in
prison owing to a mistake. “on whom did it depend? whose fault was it?”

the advocate was silent for a moment, evidently anxious to give a
correct reply.

“whose fault is it? no one’s,” he said, decidedly. “ask the procureur,
he’ll say it is the governor’s; ask the governor, he’ll say it is the
procureur’s fault. no one is in fault.”

“i am just going to see the vice-governor. i shall tell him.”

“oh, that’s quite useless,” said the advocate, with a smile. “he is such
a--he is not a relation or friend of yours?--such a blockhead, if i may
say so, and yet a crafty animal at the same time.”

nekhludoff remembered what maslennikoff had said about the advocate, and
did not answer, but took leave and went on to maslennikoff’s. he had
to ask maslennikoff two things: about maslova’s removal to the prison
hospital, and about the 130 passportless men innocently imprisoned.
though it was very hard to petition a man whom he did not respect, and
by whose orders men were flogged, yet it was the only means of gaining
his end, and he had to go through with it.

as he drove up to maslennikoff’s house nekhludoff saw a number of
different carriages by the front door, and remembered that it was
maslennikoff’s wife’s “at-home” day, to which he had been invited. at
the moment nekhludoff drove up there was a carriage in front of the
door, and a footman in livery, with a cockade in his hat, was helping
a lady down the doorstep. she was holding up her train, and showing her
thin ankles, black stockings, and slippered feet. among the carriages
was a closed landau, which he knew to be the korchagins’.

the grey-haired, red-checked coachman took off his hat and bowed in a
respectful yet friendly manner to nekhludoff, as to a gentleman he knew
well. nekhludoff had not had time to inquire for maslennikoff, when the
latter appeared on the carpeted stairs, accompanying a very important
guest not only to the first landing but to the bottom of the stairs.
this very important visitor, a military man, was speaking in french
about a lottery for the benefit of children’s homes that were to be
founded in the city, and expressed the opinion that this was a good
occupation for the ladies. “it amuses them, and the money comes.”

_“qu’elles s’amusent et que le bon dieu les benisse. m. nekhludoff!_ how
d’you do? how is it one never sees you?” he greeted nekhludoff. “_allez
presenter vos devoirs a madame._ and the korchagins are here et nadine
bukshevden. _toutes les jolies femmes de la ville,_” said the important
guest, slightly raising his uniformed shoulders as he presented them to
his own richly liveried servant to have his military overcoat put on.
“_au revoir, mon cher._” and he pressed maslennikoff’s hand.

“now, come up; i am so glad,” said maslennikoff, grasping nekhludoff’s
hand. in spite of his corpulency maslennikoff hurried quickly up the
stairs. he was in particularly good spirits, owing to the attention paid
him by the important personage. every such attention gave him the same
sense of delight as is felt by an affectionate dog when its master pats
it, strokes it, or scratches its ears. it wags its tail, cringes,
jumps about, presses its ears down, and madly rushes about in a circle.
maslennikoff was ready to do the same. he did not notice the serious
expression on nekhludoff’s face, paid no heed to his words, but pulled
him irresistibly towards the drawing-room, so that it was impossible for
nekhludoff not to follow. “business after wards. i shall do whatever
you want,” said meslennikoff, as he drew nekhludoff through the dancing
hall. “announce prince nekhludoff,” he said to a footman, without
stopping on his way. the footman started off at a trot and passed them.

“_vous n’avez qu’ a ordonner._ but you must see my wife. as it is, i got
it for letting you go without seeing her last time.”

by the time they reached the drawing-room the footman had already
announced nekhludoff, and from between the bonnets and heads that
surrounded it the smiling face of anna ignatievna, the vice-governor’s
wife, beamed on nekhludoff. at the other end of the drawing-room several
ladies were seated round the tea-table, and some military men and some
civilians stood near them. the clatter of male and female voices went on
unceasingly.

“enfin! you seem to have quite forgotten us. how have we offended?”
 with these words, intended to convey an idea of intimacy which had never
existed between herself and nekhludoff, anna ignatievna greeted the
newcomer.

“you are acquainted?--madam tilyaevsky, m. chernoff. sit down a bit
nearer. missy _vene donc a notre table on vous apportera votre_ the
. . . and you,” she said, having evidently forgotten his name, to an officer
who was talking to missy, “do come here. a cup of tea, prince?”

“i shall never, never agree with you. it’s quite simple; she did not
love,” a woman’s voice was heard saying.

“but she loved tarts.”

“oh, your eternal silly jokes!” put in, laughingly, another lady
resplendent in silks, gold, and jewels.

“c’est excellent these little biscuits, and so light. i think i’ll take
another.”

“well, are you moving soon?”

“yes, this is our last day. that’s why we have come. yes, it must be
lovely in the country; we are having a delightful spring.”

missy, with her hat on, in a dark-striped dress of some kind that fitted
her like a skin, was looking very handsome. she blushed when she saw
nekhludoff.

“and i thought you had left,” she said to him.

“i am on the point of leaving. business is keeping me in town, and it is
on business i have come here.”

“won’t you come to see mamma? she would like to see you,” she said, and
knowing that she was saying what was not true, and that he knew it also,
she blushed still more.

“i fear i shall scarcely have time,” nekhludoff said gloomily, trying
to appear as if he had not noticed her blush. missy frowned angrily,
shrugged her shoulders, and turned towards an elegant officer, who
grasped the empty cup she was holding, and knocking his sword against
the chairs, manfully carried the cup across to another table.

“you must contribute towards the home fund.”

“i am not refusing, but only wish to keep my bounty fresh for the
lottery. there i shall let it appear in all its glory.”

“well, look out for yourself,” said a voice, followed by an evidently
feigned laugh.

anna ignatievna was in raptures; her “at-home” had turned out a
brilliant success. “micky tells me you are busying yourself with prison
work. i can understand you so well,” she said to nekhludoff. “micky (she
meant her fat husband, maslennikoff) may have other defects, but you
know how kind-hearted he is. all these miserable prisoners are his
children. he does not regard them in any other light. _il est d’une
bonte---_” and she stopped, finding no words to do justice to this bonte
of his, and quickly turned to a shrivelled old woman with bows of lilac
ribbon all over, who came in just then.

having said as much as was absolutely necessary, and with as little
meaning as conventionality required, nekhludoff rose and went up to
meslennikoff. “can you give me a few minutes’ hearing, please?”

“oh, yes. well, what is it?”

“let us come in here.”

they entered a small japanese sitting-room, and sat down by the window.



chapter lviii.

the vice-governor suspicious.

“well? _je suis a vous_. will you smoke? but wait a bit; we must be
careful and not make a mess here,” said maslennikoff, and brought an
ashpan. “well?”

“there are two matters i wish to ask you about.”

“dear me!”

an expression of gloom and dejection came over maslennikoff’s
countenance, and every trace of the excitement, like that of the dog’s
whom its master has scratched behind the cars, vanished completely. the
sound of voices reached them from the drawing-room. a woman’s voice was
heard, saying, _“jamais je ne croirais,”_ and a man’s voice from
the other side relating something in which the names of la comtesse
voronzoff and victor apraksine kept recurring. a hum of voices, mixed
with laughter, came from another side. maslennikoff tried to listen to
what was going on in the drawing-room and to what nekhludoff was saying
at the same time.

“i am again come about that same woman,” said nekhludoff.

“oh, yes; i know. the one innocently condemned.”

“i would like to ask that she should be appointed to serve in the prison
hospital. i have been told that this could be arranged.”

maslennikoff compressed his lips and meditated. “that will be scarcely
possible,” he said. “however, i shall see what can be done, and shall
wire you an answer tomorrow.”

“i have been told that there were many sick, and help was needed.”

“all right, all right. i shall let you know in any case.”

“please do,” said nekhludoff.

the sound of a general and even a natural laugh came from the
drawing-room.

“that’s all that victor. he is wonderfully sharp when he is in the right
vein,” said maslennikoff.

“the next thing i wanted to tell you,” said nekhludoff, “is that 130
persons are imprisoned only because their passports are overdue. they
have been kept here a month.”

and he related the circumstances of the case.

“how have you come to know of this?” said maslennikoff, looking uneasy
and dissatisfied.

“i went to see a prisoner, and these men came and surrounded me in the
corridor, and asked . . .”

“what prisoner did you go to see?”

“a peasant who is kept in prison, though innocent. i have put his case
into the hands of a lawyer. but that is not the point.”

“is it possible that people who have done no wrong are imprisoned only
because their passports are overdue? and . . .”

“that’s the procureur’s business,” maslennikoff interrupted, angrily.
“there, now, you see what it is you call a prompt and just form of
trial. it is the business of the public prosecutor to visit the prison
and to find out if the prisoners are kept there lawfully. but that set
play cards; that’s all they do.”

“am i to understand that you can do nothing?” nekhludoff said,
despondently, remembering that the advocate had foretold that the
governor would put the blame on the procureur.

“oh, yes, i can. i shall see about it at once.”

“so much the worse for her. _c’est un souffre douleur_,” came the voice
of a woman, evidently indifferent to what she was saying, from the
drawing-room.

“so much the better. i shall take it also,” a man’s voice was heard to
say from the other side, followed by the playful laughter of a woman,
who was apparently trying to prevent the man from taking something away
from her.

“no, no; not on any account,” the woman’s voice said.

“all right, then. i shall do all this,” maslennikoff repeated, and put
out the cigarette he held in his white, turquoise-ringed hand. “and now
let us join the ladies.”

“wait a moment,” nekhludoff said, stopping at the door of the
drawing-room. “i was told that some men had received corporal punishment
in the prison yesterday. is this true?”

maslennikoff blushed.

“oh, that’s what you are after? no, mon cher, decidedly it won’t do to
let you in there; you want to get at everything. come, come; anna is
calling us,” he said, catching nekhludoff by the arm, and again becoming
as excited as after the attention paid him by the important person, only
now his excitement was not joyful, but anxious.

nekhludoff pulled his arm away, and without taking leave of any one
and without saying a word, he passed through the drawing-room with a
dejected look, went down into the hall, past the footman, who sprang
towards him, and out at the street door.

“what is the matter with him? what have you done to him?” asked anna of
her husband.

“this is _a la francaise_,” remarked some one.

“_a la francaise_, indeed--it is _a la zoulou_.”

“oh, but he’s always been like that.”

some one rose, some one came in, and the clatter went on its course.
the company used this episode with nekhludoff as a convenient topic of
conversation for the rest of the “at-home.”

on the day following his visit to maslennikoff, nekhludoff received a
letter from him, written in a fine, firm hand, on thick, glazed paper,
with a coat-of-arms, and sealed with sealing-wax. maslennikoff said
that he had written to the doctor concerning maslova’s removal to the
hospital, and hoped nekhludoff’s wish would receive attention. the
letter was signed, “your affectionate elder comrade,” and the signature
ended with a large, firm, and artistic flourish. “fool!” nekhludoff
could not refrain from saying, especially because in the word
“comrade” he felt maslennikoff’s condescension towards him, i.e., while
maslennikoff was filling this position, morally most dirty and shameful,
he still thought himself a very important man, and wished, if not
exactly to flatter nekhludoff, at least to show that he was not too
proud to call him comrade.



chapter lix.

nekhludoff’s third interview with maslova in prison.

one of the most widespread superstitions is that every man has his own
special, definite qualities; that a man is kind, cruel, wise, stupid,
energetic, apathetic, etc. men are not like that. we may say of a man
that he is more often kind than cruel, oftener wise than stupid, oftener
energetic than apathetic, or the reverse; but it would be false to say
of one man that he is kind and wise, of another that he is wicked and
foolish. and yet we always classify mankind in this way. and this is
untrue. men are like rivers: the water is the same in each, and alike in
all; but every river is narrow here, is more rapid there, here slower,
there broader, now clear, now cold, now dull, now warm. it is the same
with men. every man carries in himself the germs of every human quality,
and sometimes one manifests itself, sometimes another, and the man often
becomes unlike himself, while still remaining the same man, in some
people these changes are very rapid, and nekhludoff was such a man.
these changes in him were due to physical and to spiritual causes. at
this time he experienced such a change.

that feeling of triumph and joy at the renewal of life which he had
experienced after the trial and after the first interview with katusha,
vanished completely, and after the last interview fear and revulsion
took the place of that joy. he was determined not to leave her, and not
to change his decision of marrying her, if she wished it; but it seemed
very hard, and made him suffer.

on the day after his visit to maslennikoff, he again went to the prison
to see her.

the inspector allowed him to speak to her, only not in the advocate’s
room nor in the office, but in the women’s visiting-room. in spite
of his kindness, the inspector was more reserved with nekhludoff than
hitherto.

an order for greater caution had apparently been sent, as a result of
his conversation with meslennikoff.

“you may see her,” the inspector said; “but please remember what i
said as regards money. and as to her removal to the hospital, that his
excellency wrote to me about, it can be done; the doctor would agree.
only she herself does not wish it. she says, ‘much need have i to carry
out the slops for the scurvy beggars.’ you don’t know what these people
are, prince,” he added.

nekhludoff did not reply, but asked to have the interview. the
inspector called a jailer, whom nekhludoff followed into the women’s
visiting-room, where there was no one but maslova waiting. she came from
behind the grating, quiet and timid, close up to him, and said, without
looking at him:

“forgive me, dmitri ivanovitch, i spoke hastily the day before
yesterday.”

“it is not for me to forgive you,” nekhludoff began.

“but all the same, you must leave me,” she interrupted, and in the
terribly squinting eyes with which she looked at him nekhludoff read the
former strained, angry expression.

“why should i leave you?”

“so.”

“but why so?”

she again looked up, as it seemed to him, with the same angry look.

“well, then, thus it is,” she said. “you must leave me. it is true
what i am saying. i cannot. you just give it up altogether.” her lips
trembled and she was silent for a moment. “it is true. i’d rather hang
myself.”

nekhludoff felt that in this refusal there was hatred and unforgiving
resentment, but there was also something besides, something good. this
confirmation of the refusal in cold blood at once quenched all the
doubts in nekhludoff’s bosom, and brought back the serious, triumphant
emotion he had felt in relation to katusha.

“katusha, what i have said i will again repeat,” he uttered, very
seriously. “i ask you to marry me. if you do not wish it, and for as
long as you do not wish it, i shall only continue to follow you, and
shall go where you are taken.”

“that is your business. i shall not say anything more,” she answered,
and her lips began to tremble again.

he, too, was silent, feeling unable to speak.

“i shall now go to the country, and then to petersburg,” he said, when
he was quieter again. “i shall do my utmost to get your--our case, i
mean, reconsidered, and by the help of god the sentence may be revoked.”

“and if it is not revoked, never mind. i have deserved it, if not in
this case, in other ways,” she said, and he saw how difficult it was for
her to keep down her tears.

“well, have you seen menshoff?” she suddenly asked, to hide her emotion.
“it’s true they are innocent, isn’t it?”

“yes, i think so.”

“such a splendid old woman,” she said.

there was another pause.

“well, and as to the hospital?” she suddenly said, and looking at him
with her squinting eyes. “if you like, i will go, and i shall not drink
any spirits, either.”

nekhludoff looked into her eyes. they were smiling.

“yes, yes, she is quite a different being,” nekhludoff thought. after
all his former doubts, he now felt something he had never before
experienced--the certainty that love is invincible.

when maslova returned to her noisome cell after this interview, she took
off her cloak and sat down in her place on the shelf bedstead with her
hands folded on her lap. in the cell were only the consumptive woman,
the vladimir woman with her baby, menshoff’s old mother, and the
watchman’s wife. the deacon’s daughter had the day before been declared
mentally diseased and removed to the hospital. the rest of the women
were away, washing clothes. the old woman was asleep, the cell door
stood open, and the watchman’s children were in the corridor outside.
the vladimir woman, with her baby in her arms, and the watchman’s
wife, with the stocking she was knitting with deft fingers, came up to
maslova. “well, have you had a chat?” they asked. maslova sat silent on
the high bedstead, swinging her legs, which did not reach to the floor.

“what’s the good of snivelling?” said the watchman’s wife. “the chief
thing’s not to go down into the dumps. eh, katusha? now, then!” and she
went on, quickly moving her fingers.

maslova did not answer.

“and our women have all gone to wash,” said the vladimir woman. “i
heard them say much has been given in alms to-day. quite a lot has been
brought.”

“finashka,” called out the watchman’s wife, “where’s the little imp gone
to?”

she took a knitting needle, stuck it through both the ball and the
stocking, and went out into the corridor.

at this moment the sound of women’s voices was heard from the corridor,
and the inmates of the cell entered, with their prison shoes, but
no stockings on their feet. each was carrying a roll, some even two.
theodosia came at once up to maslova.

“what’s the matter; is anything wrong?” theodosia asked, looking
lovingly at maslova with her clear, blue eyes. “this is for our tea,”
 and she put the rolls on a shelf.

“why, surely he has not changed his mind about marrying?” asked
korableva.

“no, he has not, but i don’t wish to,” said maslova, “and so i told
him.”

“more fool you!” muttered korableva in her deep tones.

“if one’s not to live together, what’s the use of marrying?” said
theodosia.

“there’s your husband--he’s going with you,” said the watchman’s wife.

“well, of course, we’re married,” said theodosia. “but why should he go
through the ceremony if he is not to live with her?”

“why, indeed! don’t be a fool! you know if he marries her she’ll roll in
wealth,” said korableva.

“he says, ‘wherever they take you, i’ll follow,’” said maslova. “if he
does, it’s well; if he does not, well also. i am not going to ask him
to. now he is going to try and arrange the matter in petersburg. he is
related to all the ministers there. but, all the same, i have no need of
him,” she continued.

“of course not,” suddenly agreed korableva, evidently thinking about
something else as she sat examining her bag. “well, shall we have a
drop?”

“you have some,” replied maslova. “i won’t.”

end of book i.




book ii.



chapter i.

property in land.

it was possible for maslova’s case to come before the senate in a
fortnight, at which time nekhludoff meant to go to petersburg, and, if
need be, to appeal to the emperor (as the advocate who had drawn up the
petition advised) should the appeal be disregarded (and, according to
the advocate, it was best to be prepared for that, since the causes for
appeal were so slight). the party of convicts, among whom was maslova,
would very likely leave in the beginning of june. in order to be able to
follow her to siberia, as nekhludoff was firmly resolved to do, he was
now obliged to visit his estates, and settle matters there. nekhludoff
first went to the nearest, kousminski, a large estate that lay in the
black earth district, and from which he derived the greatest part of his
income.

he had lived on that estate in his childhood and youth, and had been
there twice since, and once, at his mother’s request, he had taken a
german steward there, and had with him verified the accounts. the state
of things there and the peasants’ relations to the management, i.e.,
the landlord, had therefore been long known to him. the relations of the
peasants to the administration were those of utter dependence on that
management. nekhludoff knew all this when still a university student,
he had confessed and preached henry georgeism, and, on the basis of that
teaching, had given the land inherited from his father to the peasants.
it is true that after entering the army, when he got into the habit of
spending 20,000 roubles a year, those former occupations ceased to be
regarded as a duty, and were forgotten, and he not only left off asking
himself where the money his mother allowed him came from, but even
avoided thinking about it. but his mother’s death, the coming into the
property, and the necessity of managing it, again raised the question
as to what his position in reference to private property in land was. a
month before nekhludoff would have answered that he had not the strength
to alter the existing order of things; that it was not he who was
administering the estate; and would one way or another have eased his
conscience, continuing to live far from his estates, and having the
money sent him. but now he decided that he could not leave things to go
on as they were, but would have to alter them in a way unprofitable
to himself, even though he had all these complicated and difficult
relations with the prison world which made money necessary, as well as a
probable journey to siberia before him. therefore he decided not to farm
the land, but to let it to the peasants at a low rent, to enable them
to cultivate it without depending on a landlord. more than once, when
comparing the position of a landowner with that of an owner of serfs,
nekhludoff had compared the renting of land to the peasants instead
of cultivating it with hired labour, to the old system by which serf
proprietors used to exact a money payment from their serfs in place of
labour. it was not a solution of the problem, and yet a step towards the
solution; it was a movement towards a less rude form of slavery. and it
was in this way he meant to act.

nekhludoff reached kousminski about noon. trying to simplify his life
in every way, he did not telegraph, but hired a cart and pair at the
station. the driver was a young fellow in a nankeen coat, with a belt
below his long waist. he was glad to talk to the gentleman, especially
because while they were talking his broken-winded white horse and the
emaciated spavined one could go at a foot-pace, which they always liked
to do.

the driver spoke about the steward at kousminski without knowing that he
was driving “the master.” nekhludoff had purposely not told him who he
was.

“that ostentatious german,” said the driver (who had been to town and
read novels) as he sat sideways on the box, passing his hand from
the top to the bottom of his long whip, and trying to show off his
accomplishments--“that ostentatious german has procured three light
bays, and when he drives out with his lady---oh, my! at christmas he had
a christmas-tree in the big house. i drove some of the visitors there.
it had ‘lectric lights; you could not see the like of it in the whole
of the government. what’s it to him, he has cribbed a heap of money. i
heard say he has bought an estate.”

nekhludoff had imagined that he was quite indifferent to the way the
steward managed his estate, and what advantages the steward derived from
it. the words of the long-waisted driver, however, were not pleasant to
hear.

a dark cloud now and then covered the sun; the larks were soaring above
the fields of winter corn; the forests were already covered with fresh
young green; the meadows speckled with grazing cattle and horses. the
fields were being ploughed, and nekhludoff enjoyed the lovely day. but
every now and then he had an unpleasant feeling, and, when he asked
himself what it was caused by, he remembered what the driver had told
him about the way the german was managing kousminski. when he got to his
estate and set to work this unpleasant feeling vanished.

looking over the books in the office, and a talk with the foreman, who
naively pointed out the advantages to be derived from the facts that the
peasants had very little land of their own and that it lay in the midst
of the landlord’s fields, made nekhludoff more than ever determined to
leave off farming and to let his land to the peasants.

from the office books and his talk with the foreman, nekhludoff found
that two-thirds of the best of the cultivated land was still being
tilled with improved machinery by labourers receiving fixed wages, while
the other third was tilled by the peasants at the rate of five roubles
per desiatin [about two and three-quarter acres]. so that the peasants
had to plough each desiatin three times, harrow it three times, sow
and mow the corn, make it into sheaves, and deliver it on the threshing
ground for five roubles, while the same amount of work done by wage
labour came to at least 10 roubles. everything the peasants got from the
office they paid for in labour at a very high price. they paid in labour
for the use of the meadows, for wood, for potato-stalks, and were nearly
all of them in debt to the office. thus, for the land that lay beyond
the cultivated fields, which the peasants hired, four times the price
that its value would bring in if invested at five per cent was taken
from the peasants.

nekhludoff had known all this before, but he now saw it in a new light,
and wondered how he and others in his position could help seeing how
abnormal such conditions are. the steward’s arguments that if the land
were let to the peasants the agricultural implements would fetch next to
nothing, as it would be impossible to get even a quarter of their value
for them, and that the peasants would spoil the land, and how great a
loser nekhludoff would be, only strengthened nekhludoff in the opinion
that he was doing a good action in letting the land to the peasants
and thus depriving himself of a large part of his income. he decided to
settle this business now, at once, while he was there. the reaping and
selling of the corn he left for the steward to manage in due season, and
also the selling of the agricultural implements and useless buildings.
but he asked his steward to call the peasants of the three neighbouring
villages that lay in the midst of his estate (kousminski) to a meeting,
at which he would tell them of his intentions and arrange about the
price at which they were to rent the land.

with the pleasant sense of the firmness he had shown in the face of the
steward’s arguments, and his readiness to make a sacrifice, nekhludoff
left the office, thinking over the business before him, and strolled
round the house, through the neglected flower-garden--this year the
flowers were planted in front of the steward’s house--over the tennis
ground, now overgrown with dandelions, and along the lime-tree walk,
where he used to smoke his cigar, and where he had flirted with the
pretty kirimova, his mother’s visitor. having briefly prepared in his
mind the speech he was going to make to the peasants, he again went in
to the steward, and, after tea, having once more arranged his thoughts,
he went into the room prepared for him in the big house, which used to
be a spare bedroom.

in this clean little room, with pictures of venice on the walls, and a
mirror between the two windows, there stood a clean bed with a spring
mattress, and by the side of it a small table, with a decanter of water,
matches, and an extinguisher. on a table by the looking-glass lay his
open portmanteau, with his dressing-case and some books in it; a russian
book, the investigation of the laws of criminality, and a german and
an english book on the same subject, which he meant to read while
travelling in the country. but it was too late to begin to-day, and he
began preparing to go to bed.

an old-fashioned inlaid mahogany arm-chair stood in the corner of
the room, and this chair, which nekhludoff remembered standing in his
mother’s bedroom, suddenly raised a perfectly unexpected sensation in
his soul. he was suddenly filled with regret at the thought of the house
that would tumble to ruin, and the garden that would run wild, and the
forest that would be cut down, and all these farmyards, stables, sheds,
machines, horses, cows which he knew had cost so much effort, though not
to himself, to acquire and to keep. it had seemed easy to give up all
this, but now it was hard, not only to give this, but even to let the
land and lose half his income. and at once a consideration, which proved
that it was unreasonable to let the land to the peasants, and thus to
destroy his property, came to his service. “i must not hold property in
land. if i possess no property in land, i cannot keep up the house and
farm. and, besides, i am going to siberia, and shall not need either
the house or the estate,” said one voice. “all this is so,” said another
voice, “but you are not going to spend all your life in siberia. you may
marry, and have children, and must hand the estate on to them in as good
a condition as you received it. there is a duty to the land, too.
to give up, to destroy everything is very easy; to acquire it very
difficult. above all, you must consider your future life, and what
you will do with yourself, and you must dispose of your property
accordingly. and are you really firm in your resolve? and then, are you
really acting according to your conscience, or are you acting in order
to be admired of men?” nekhludoff asked himself all this, and had to
acknowledge that he was influenced by the thought of what people would
say about him. and the more he thought about it the more questions
arose, and the more unsolvable they seemed.

in hopes of ridding himself of these thoughts by falling asleep, and
solving them in the morning when his head would be fresh, he lay down on
his clean bed. but it was long before he could sleep. together with the
fresh air and the moonlight, the croaking of the frogs entered the room,
mingling with the trills of a couple of nightingales in the park and
one close to the window in a bush of lilacs in bloom. listening to
the nightingales and the frogs, nekhludoff remembered the inspector’s
daughter, and her music, and the inspector; that reminded him of
maslova, and how her lips trembled, like the croaking of the frogs, when
she said, “you must just leave it.” then the german steward began going
down to the frogs, and had to be held back, but he not only went down
but turned into maslova, who began reproaching nekhludoff, saying, “you
are a prince, and i am a convict.” “no, i must not give in,” thought
nekhludoff, waking up, and again asking himself, “is what i am doing
right? i do not know, and no matter, no matter, i must only fall asleep
now.” and he began himself to descend where he had seen the inspector
and maslova climbing down to, and there it all ended.



chapter ii.

efforts at land restoration.

the next day nekhludoff awoke at nine o’clock. the young office clerk
who attended on “the master” brought him his boots, shining as they had
never shone before, and some cold, beautifully clear spring water, and
informed him that the peasants were already assembling.

nekhludoff jumped out of bed, and collected his thoughts. not a trace
of yesterday’s regret at giving up and thus destroying his property
remained now. he remembered this feeling of regret with surprise; he was
now looking forward with joy to the task before him, and could not help
being proud of it. he could see from the window the old tennis ground,
overgrown with dandelions, on which the peasants were beginning to
assemble. the frogs had not croaked in vain the night before; the day
was dull. there was no wind; a soft warm rain had begun falling in the
morning, and hung in drops on leaves, twigs, and grass. besides the
smell of the fresh vegetation, the smell of damp earth, asking for more
rain, entered in at the window. while dressing, nekhludoff several times
looked out at the peasants gathered on the tennis ground. one by one
they came, took off their hats or caps to one another, and took their
places in a circle, leaning on their sticks. the steward, a stout,
muscular, strong young man, dressed in a short pea-jacket, with a
green stand-up collar, and enormous buttons, came to say that all had
assembled, but that they might wait until nekhludoff had finished his
breakfast--tea and coffee, whichever he pleased; both were ready.

“no, i think i had better go and see them at once,” said nekhludoff,
with an unexpected feeling of shyness and shame at the thought of the
conversation he was going to have with the peasants. he was going to
fulfil a wish of the peasants, the fulfilment of which they did not
even dare to hope for--to let the land to them at a low price, i.e.,
to confer a great boon; and yet he felt ashamed of something. when
nekhludoff came up to the peasants, and the fair, the curly, the bald,
the grey heads were bared before him, he felt so confused that he
could say nothing. the rain continued to come down in small drops,
that remained on the hair, the beards, and the fluff of the men’s rough
coats. the peasants looked at “the master,” waiting for him to speak,
and he was so abashed that he could not speak. this confused silence
was broken by the sedate, self-assured german steward, who considered
himself a good judge of the russian peasant, and who spoke russian
remarkably well. this strong, over-fed man, and nekhludoff himself,
presented a striking contrast to the peasants, with their thin, wrinkled
faces and the shoulder blades protruding beneath their coarse coats.

“here’s the prince wanting to do you a favor, and to let the land to
you; only you are not worthy of it,” said the steward.

“how are we not worthy of it, vasili karlovitch? don’t we work for you?
we were well satisfied with the deceased lady--god have mercy on her
soul--and the young prince will not desert us now. our thanks to him,”
 said a redhaired, talkative peasant.

“yes, that’s why i have called you together. i should like to let you
have all the land, if you wish it.”

the peasants said nothing, as if they did not understand or did not
believe it.

“let’s see. let us have the land? what do you mean?” asked a middle-aged
man.

“to let it to you, that you might have the use of it, at a low rent.”

“a very agreeable thing,” said an old man.

“if only the pay is such as we can afford,” said another.

“there’s no reason why we should not rent the land.”

“we are accustomed to live by tilling the ground.”

“and it’s quieter for you, too, that way. you’ll have to do nothing
but receive the rent. only think of all the sin and worry now!” several
voices were heard saying.

“the sin is all on your side,” the german remarked. “if only you did
your work, and were orderly.”

“that’s impossible for the likes of us,” said a sharp-nosed old man.
“you say, ‘why do you let the horse get into the corn?’ just as if i
let it in. why, i was swinging my scythe, or something of the kind,
the livelong day, till the day seemed as long as a year, and so i fell
asleep while watching the herd of horses at night, and it got into your
oats, and now you’re skinning me.”

“and you should keep order.”

“it’s easy for you to talk about order, but it’s more than our strength
will bear,” answered a tall, dark, hairy middleaged man.

“didn’t i tell you to put up a fence?”

“you give us the wood to make it of,” said a short, plain-looking
peasant. “i was going to put up a fence last year, and you put me to
feed vermin in prison for three months. that was the end of that fence.”

“what is it he is saying?” asked nekhludoff, turning to the steward.

“der ersto dieb im dorfe,” [the greatest thief in the village] answered
the steward in german. “he is caught stealing wood from the forest every
year.” then turning to the peasant, he added, “you must learn to respect
other people’s property.”

“why, don’t we respect you?” said an old man. “we are obliged to respect
you. why, you could twist us into a rope; we are in your hands.”

“eh, my friend, it’s impossible to do you. it’s you who are ever ready
to do us,” said the steward.

“do you, indeed. didn’t you smash my jaw for me, and i got nothing for
it? no good going to law with the rich, it seems.”

“you should keep to the law.”

a tournament of words was apparently going on without those who took
part in it knowing exactly what it was all about; but it was noticeable
that there was bitterness on one side, restricted by fear, and on the
other a consciousness of importance and power. it was very trying to
nekhludoff to listen to all this, so he returned to the question of
arranging the amount and the terms of the rent.

“well, then, how about the land? do you wish to take it, and what price
will you pay if i let you have the whole of it?”

“the property is yours: it is for you to fix the price.”

nekhludoff named the price. though it was far below that paid in the
neighbourhood, the peasants declared it too high, and began bargaining,
as is customary among them. nekhludoff thought his offer would be
accepted with pleasure, but no signs of pleasure were visible.

one thing only showed nekhludoff that his offer was a profitable one
to the peasants. the question as to who would rent the land, the whole
commune or a special society, was put, and a violent dispute arose among
those peasants who were in favour of excluding the weak and those not
likely to pay the rent regularly, and the peasants who would have to be
excluded on that score. at last, thanks to the steward, the amount and
the terms of the rent were fixed, and the peasants went down the hill
towards their villages, talking noisily, while nekhludoff and the
steward went into the office to make up the agreement. everything was
settled in the way nekhludoff wished and expected it to be. the peasants
had their land 30 per cent. cheaper than they could have got it anywhere
in the district, the revenue from the land was diminished by half, but
was more than sufficient for nekhludoff, especially as there would be
money coming in for a forest he sold, as well as for the agricultural
implements, which would be sold, too. everything seemed excellently
arranged, yet he felt ashamed of something. he could see that the
peasants, though they spoke words of thanks, were not satisfied, and
had expected something greater. so it turned out that he had deprived
himself of a great deal, and yet not done what the peasants had
expected.

the next day the agreement was signed, and accompanied by several old
peasants, who had been chosen as deputies, nekhludoff went out, got
into the steward’s elegant equipage (as the driver from the station had
called it), said “good-bye” to the peasants, who stood shaking their
heads in a dissatisfied and disappointed manner, and drove off to the
station. nekhludoff was dissatisfied with himself without knowing why,
but all the time he felt sad and ashamed of something.



chapter iii.

old associations.

from kousminski nekhludoff went to the estate he had inherited from his
aunts, the same where he first met katusha. he meant to arrange about
the land there in the way he had done in kousminski. besides this, he
wished to find out all he could about katusha and her baby, and when and
how it had died. he got to panovo early one morning, and the first thing
that struck him when he drove up was the look of decay and dilapidation
that all the buildings bore, especially the house itself. the iron
roofs, which had once been painted green, looked red with rust, and
a few sheets of iron were bent back, probably by a storm. some of the
planks which covered the house from outside were torn away in several
places; these were easier to get by breaking the rusty nails that held
them. both porches, but especially the side porch he remembered so well,
were rotten and broken; only the banister remained. some of the windows
were boarded up, and the building in which the foreman lived, the
kitchen, the stables--all were grey and decaying. only the garden had
not decayed, but had grown, and was in full bloom; from over the fence
the cherry, apple, and plum trees looked like white clouds. the lilac
bushes that formed the hedge were in full bloom, as they had been
when, 14 years ago, nekhludoff had played gorelki with the 15-year-old
katusha, and had fallen and got his hand stung by the nettles behind one
of those lilac bushes. the larch that his aunt sophia had planted near
the house, which then was only a short stick, had grown into a tree,
the trunk of which would have made a beam, and its branches were covered
with soft yellow green needles as with down. the river, now within its
banks, rushed noisily over the mill dam. the meadow the other side of
the river was dotted over by the peasants’ mixed herds. the foreman,
a student, who had left the seminary without finishing the course, met
nekhludoff in the yard, with a smile on his face, and, still smiling,
asked him to come into the office, and, as if promising something
exceptionally good by this smile, he went behind a partition. for a
moment some whispering was heard behind the partition. the isvostchik
who had driven nekhludoff from the station, drove away after receiving
a tip, and all was silent. then a barefooted girl passed the window;
she had on an embroidered peasant blouse, and long earrings in her ears;
then a man walked past, clattering with his nailed boots on the trodden
path.

nekhludoff sat down by the little casement, and looked out into the
garden and listened. a soft, fresh spring breeze, smelling of newly-dug
earth, streamed in through the window, playing with the hair on his damp
forehead and the papers that lay on the window-sill, which was all cut
about with a knife.

“tra-pa-trop, tra-pa-trop,” comes a sound from the river, as the women
who were washing clothes there slapped them in regular measure with
their wooden bats, and the sound spread over the glittering surface of
the mill pond while the rhythmical sound of the falling water came from
the mill, and a frightened fly suddenly flew loudly buzzing past his
ear.

and all at once nekhludoff remembered how, long ago, when he was young
and innocent, he had heard the women’s wooden bats slapping the wet
clothes above the rhythmical sound from the mill, and in the same way
the spring breeze had blown about the hair on his wet forehead and the
papers on the window-sill, which was all cut about with a knife, and
just in the same way a fly had buzzed loudly past his car.

it was not exactly that he remembered himself as a lad of 15, but he
seemed to feel himself the same as he was then, with the same freshness
and purity, and full of the same grand possibilities for the future, and
at the same time, as it happens in a dream, he knew that all this could
be no more, and he felt terribly sad. “at what time would you like
something to eat?” asked the foreman, with a smile.

“when you like; i am not hungry. i shall go for a walk through the
village.”

“would you not like to come into the house? everything is in order
there. have the goodness to look in. if the outside---”

“not now; later on. tell me, please, have you got a woman here called
matrona kharina?” (this was katusha’s aunt, the village midwife.)

“oh, yes; in the village she keeps a secret pot-house. i know she does,
and i accuse her of it and scold her; but as to taking her up, it would
be a pity. an old woman, you know; she has grandchildren,” said the
foreman, continuing to smile in the same manner, partly wishing to
be pleasant to the master, and partly because he was convinced that
nekhludoff understood all these matters just as well as he did himself.

“where does she live? i shall go across and see her.”

“at the end of the village; the further side, the third from the end. to
the left there is a brick cottage, and her hut is beyond that. but i’d
better see you there,” the foreman said with a graceful smile.

“no, thanks, i shall find it; and you be so good as to call a meeting
of the peasants, and tell them that i want to speak to them about
the land,” said nekhludoff, with the intention of coming to the same
agreement with the peasants here as he had done in kousminski, and, if
possible, that same evening.



chapter iv.

the peasants’ lot.

when nekhludoff came out of the gate he met the girl with the long
earrings on the well-trodden path that lay across the pasture
ground, overgrown with dock and plantain leaves. she had a long,
brightly-coloured apron on, and was quickly swinging her left arm in
front of herself as she stepped briskly with her fat, bare feet. with
her right arm she was pressing a fowl to her stomach. the fowl, with
red comb shaking, seemed perfectly calm; he only rolled up his eyes and
stretched out and drew in one black leg, clawing the girl’s apron. when
the girl came nearer to “the master,” she began moving more slowly, and
her run changed into a walk. when she came up to him she stopped, and,
after a backward jerk with her head, bowed to him; and only when he had
passed did she recommence to run homeward with the cock. as he went down
towards the well, he met an old woman, who had a coarse dirty blouse on,
carrying two pails full of water, that hung on a yoke across her bent
back. the old woman carefully put down the pails and bowed, with the
same backward jerk of her head.

after passing the well nekhludoff entered the village. it was a bright,
hot day, and oppressive, though only ten o’clock. at intervals the sun
was hidden by the gathering clouds. an unpleasant, sharp smell of manure
filled the air in the street. it came from carts going up the hillside,
but chiefly from the disturbed manure heaps in the yards of the huts,
by the open gates of which nekhludoff had to pass. the peasants,
barefooted, their shirts and trousers soiled with manure, turned to look
at the tall, stout gentleman with the glossy silk ribbon on his grey hat
who was walking up the village street, touching the ground every other
step with a shiny, bright-knobbed walking-stick. the peasants returning
from the fields at a trot and jotting in their empty carts, took
off their hats, and, in their surprise, followed with their eyes the
extraordinary man who was walking up their street. the women came out
of the gates or stood in the porches of their huts, pointing him out to
each other and gazing at him as he passed.

when nekhludoff was passing the fourth gate, he was stopped by a cart
that was coming out, its wheels creaking, loaded high with manure, which
was pressed down, and was covered with a mat to sit on. a six-year-old
boy, excited by the prospect of a drive, followed the cart. a young
peasant, with shoes plaited out of bark on his feet, led the horse out
of the yard. a long-legged colt jumped out of the gate; but, seeing
nekhludoff, pressed close to the cart, and scraping its legs against the
wheels, jumped forward, past its excited, gently-neighing mother, as she
was dragging the heavy load through the gateway. the next horse was led
out by a barefooted old man, with protruding shoulder-blades, in a dirty
shirt and striped trousers.

when the horses got out on to the hard road, strewn over with bits
of dry, grey manure, the old man returned to the gate, and bowed to
nekhludoff.

“you are our ladies’ nephew, aren’t you?”

“yes, i am their nephew.”

“you’ve kindly come to look us up, eh?” said the garrulous old man.

“yes, i have. well, how are you getting on?”

“how do we get on? we get on very badly,” the old man drawled, as if it
gave him pleasure.

“why so badly?” nekhludoff asked, stepping inside the gate.

“what is our life but the very worst life?” said the old man, following
nekhludoff into that part of the yard which was roofed over.

nekhludoff stopped under the roof.

“i have got 12 of them there,” continued the old man, pointing to two
women on the remainder of the manure heap, who stood perspiring with
forks in their hands, the kerchiefs tumbling off their heads, with their
skirts tucked up, showing the calves of their dirty, bare legs. “not a
month passes but i have to buy six poods [a pood is 36 english pounds]
of corn, and where’s the money to come from?”

“have you not got enough corn of your own?”

“my own?” repeated the old man, with a smile of contempt; “why i have
only got land for three, and last year we had not enough to last till
christmas.”

“what do you do then?”

“what do we do? why, i hire out as a labourer; and then i borrowed some
money from your honour. we spent it all before lent, and the tax is not
paid yet.”

“and how much is the tax?”

“why, it’s 17 roubles for my household. oh, lord, such a life! one
hardly knows one’s self how one manages to live it.”

“may i go into your hut?” asked nekhludoff, stepping across the yard
over the yellow-brown layers of manure that had been raked up by the
forks, and were giving off a strong smell.

“why not? come in,” said the old man, and stepping quickly with his
bare feet over the manure, the liquid oozing between his toes, he passed
nekhludoff and opened the door of the hut.

the women arranged the kerchiefs on their heads and let down their
skirts, and stood looking with surprise at the clean gentleman with gold
studs to his sleeves who was entering their house. two little girls,
with nothing on but coarse chemises, rushed out of the hut. nekhludoff
took off his hat, and, stooping to get through the low door, entered,
through a passage into the dirty, narrow hut, that smelt of sour food,
and where much space was taken up by two weaving looms. in the hut an
old woman was standing by the stove, with the sleeves rolled up over her
thin, sinewy brown arms.

“here is our master come to see us,” said the old man.

“i’m sure he’s very welcome,” said the old woman, kindly.

“i would like to see how you live.”

“well, you see how we live. the hut is coming down, and might kill one
any day; but my old man he says it’s good enough, and so we live like
kings,” said the brisk old woman, nervously jerking her head. “i’m
getting the dinner; going to feed the workers.”

“and what are you going to have for dinner?”

“our food is very good. first course, bread and kvas; [kvas is a kind of
sour, non-intoxicant beer made of rye] second course, kvas and bread,”
 said the old woman, showing her teeth, which were half worn away.

“no,” seriously; “let me see what you are going to eat.”

“to eat?” said the old man, laughing. “ours is not a very cunning meal.
you just show him, wife.”

“want to see our peasant food? well, you are an inquisitive gentleman,
now i come to look at you. he wants to know everything. did i not tell
you bread and kvas and then we’ll have soup. a woman brought us some
fish, and that’s what the soup is made of, and after that, potatoes.”

“nothing more?”

“what more do you want? we’ll also have a little milk,” said the old
woman, looking towards the door. the door stood open, and the passage
outside was full of people--boys, girls, women with babies--thronged
together to look at the strange gentleman who wanted to see the
peasants’ food. the old woman seemed to pride herself on the way she
behaved with a gentleman.

“yes, it’s a miserable life, ours; that goes without saying, sir,” said
the old man. “what are you doing there?” he shouted to those in the
passage. “well, good-bye,” said nekhludoff, feeling ashamed and uneasy,
though unable to account for the feeling.

“thank you kindly for having looked us up,” said the old man.

the people in the passage pressed closer together to let nekhludoff
pass, and he went out and continued his way up the street.

two barefooted boys followed him out of the passage the elder in a
shirt that had once been white, the other in a worn and faded pink one.
nekhludoff looked back at them.

“and where are you going now?” asked the boy with the white shirt.
nekhludoff answered: “to matrona kharina. do you know her?” the boy
with the pink shirt began laughing at something; but the elder asked,
seriously:

“what matrona is that? is she old?”

“yes, she is old.”

“oh--oh,” he drawled; “that one; she’s at the other end of the village;
we’ll show you. yes, fedka, we’ll go with him. shall we?”

“yes, but the horses?”

“they’ll be all right, i dare say.”

fedka agreed, and all three went up the street.



chapter v.

maslova’s aunt.

nekhludoff felt more at ease with the boys than with the grown-up
people, and he began talking to them as they went along. the little
one with the pink shirt stopped laughing, and spoke as sensibly and as
exactly as the elder one.

“can you tell me who are the poorest people you have got here?” asked
nekhludoff.

“the poorest? michael is poor, simon makhroff, and martha, she is very
poor.”

“and anisia, she is still poorer; she’s not even got a cow. they go
begging,” said little fedka.

“she’s not got a cow, but they are only three persons, and martha’s
family are five,” objected the elder boy.

“but the other’s a widow,” the pink boy said, standing up for anisia.

“you say anisia is a widow, and martha is no better than a widow,” said
the elder boy; “she’s also no husband.”

“and where is her husband?” nekhludoff asked.

“feeding vermin in prison,” said the elder boy, using this expression,
common among the peasants.

“a year ago he cut down two birch trees in the land-lord’s forest,” the
little pink boy hurried to say, “so he was locked up; now he’s sitting
the sixth month there, and the wife goes begging. there are three
children and a sick grandmother,” he went on with his detailed account.

“and where does she live?” nekhludoff asked.

“in this very house,” answered the boy, pointing to a hut, in front
of which, on the footpath along which nekhludoff was walking, a tiny,
flaxen-headed infant stood balancing himself with difficulty on his
rickety legs.

“vaska! where’s the little scamp got to?” shouted a woman, with a dirty
grey blouse, and a frightened look, as she ran out of the house, and,
rushing forward, seized the baby before nekhludoff came up to it, and
carried it in, just as if she were afraid that nekhludoff would hurt her
child.

this was the woman whose husband was imprisoned for nekhludoff’s birch
trees.

“well, and this matrona, is she also poor?” nekhludoff asked, as they
came up to matrona’s house.

“she poor? no. why, she sells spirits,” the thin, pink little boy
answered decidedly.

when they reached the house nekhludoff left the boys outside and went
through the passage into the hut. the hut was 14 feet long. the bed
that stood behind the big stove was not long enough for a tall person
to stretch out on. “and on this very bed,” nekhludoff thought, “katusha
bore her baby and lay ill afterwards.” the greater part of the hut was
taken up by a loom, on which the old woman and her eldest granddaughter
were arranging the warp when nekhludoff came in, striking his forehead
against the low doorway. two other grandchildren came rushing in after
nekhludoff, and stopped, holding on to the lintels of the door.

“whom do you want?” asked the old woman, crossly. she was in a bad
temper because she could not manage to get the warp right, and, besides,
carrying on an illicit trade in spirits, she was always afraid when any
stranger came in.

“i am--the owner of the neighbouring estates, and should like to speak
to you.”

“dear me; why, it’s you, my honey; and i, fool, thought it was just some
passer-by. dear me, you--it’s you, my precious,” said the old woman,
with simulated tenderness in her voice.

“i should like to speak to you alone,” said nekhludoff, with a glance
towards the door, where the children were standing, and behind them a
woman holding a wasted, pale baby, with a sickly smile on its face, who
had a little cap made of different bits of stuff on its head.

“what are you staring at? i’ll give it you. just hand me my crutch,” the
old woman shouted to those at the door.

“shut the door, will you!” the children went away, and the woman closed
the door.

“and i was thinking, who’s that? and it’s ‘the master’ himself. my
jewel, my treasure. just think,” said the old woman, “where he has
deigned to come. sit down here, your honour,” she said, wiping the seat
with her apron. “and i was thinking what devil is it coming in, and it’s
your honour, ‘the master’ himself, the good gentleman, our benefactor.
forgive me, old fool that i am; i’m getting blind.”

nekhludoff sat down, and the old woman stood in front of him, leaning
her cheek on her right hand, while the left held up the sharp elbow of
her right arm.

“dear me, you have grown old, your honour; and you used to be as fresh
as a daisy. and now! cares also, i expect?”

“this is what i have come about: do you remember katusha maslova?”

“katerina? i should think so. why, she is my niece. how could i help
remembering; and the tears i have shed because of her. why, i know all
about it. eh, sir, who has not sinned before god? who has not offended
against the tsar? we know what youth is. you used to be drinking tea and
coffee, so the devil got hold of you. he is strong at times. what’s to
be done? now, if you had chucked her; but no, just see how you rewarded
her, gave her a hundred roubles. and she? what has she done? had she
but listened to me she might have lived all right. i must say the truth,
though she is my niece: that girl’s no good. what a good place i found
her! she would not submit, but abused her master. is it for the likes
of us to scold gentlefolk? well, she was sent away. and then at the
forester’s. she might have lived there; but no, she would not.”

“i want to know about the child. she was confined at your house, was she
not? where’s the child?”

“as to the child, i considered that well at the time. she was so bad
i never thought she would get up again. well, so i christened the baby
quite properly, and we sent it to the foundlings’. why should one let
an innocent soul languish when the mother is dying? others do like this:
they just leave the baby, don’t feed it, and it wastes away. but, thinks
i, no; i’d rather take some trouble, and send it to the foundlings’.
there was money enough, so i sent it off.”

“did you not get its registration number from the foundlings’ hospital?”

“yes, there was a number, but the baby died,” she said. “it died as soon
as she brought it there.”

“who is she?”

“that same woman who used to live in skorodno. she made a business of
it. her name was malania. she’s dead now. she was a wise woman. what do
you think she used to do? they’d bring her a baby, and she’d keep it and
feed it; and she’d feed it until she had enough of them to take to the
foundlings’. when she had three or four, she’d take them all at once.
she had such a clever arrangement, a sort of big cradle--a double one
she could put them in one way or the other. it had a handle. so she’d
put four of them in, feet to feet and the heads apart, so that they
should not knock against each other. and so she took four at once. she’d
put some pap in a rag into their mouths to keep ‘em silent, the pets.”

“well, go on.”

“well, she took katerina’s baby in the same way, after keeping it a
fortnight, i believe. it was in her house it began to sicken.”

“and was it a fine baby?” nekhludoff asked.

“such a baby, that if you wanted a finer you could not find one. your
very image,” the old woman added, with a wink.

“why did it sicken? was the food bad?”

“eh, what food? only just a pretence of food. naturally, when it’s not
one’s own child. only enough to get it there alive. she said she
just managed to get it to moscow, and there it died. she brought a
certificate--all in order. she was such a wise woman.”

that was all nekhludoff could find out concerning his child.



chapter vi.

reflections of a landlord.

again striking his head against both doors, nekhludoff went out into the
street, where the pink and the white boys were waiting for him. a few
newcomers were standing with them. among the women, of whom several
had babies in their arms, was the thin woman with the baby who had the
patchwork cap on its head. she held lightly in her arms the bloodless
infant, who kept strangely smiling all over its wizened little face, and
continually moving its crooked thumbs.

nekhludoff knew the smile to be one of suffering. he asked who the woman
was.

“it is that very anisia i told you about,” said the elder boy.

nekhludoff turned to anisia.

“how do you live?” he asked. “by what means do you gain your
livelihood?”

“how do i live? i go begging,” said anisia, and began to cry.

nekhludoff took out his pocket-book, and gave the woman a 10-rouble
note. he had not had time to take two steps before another woman with
a baby caught him up, then an old woman, then another young one. all of
them spoke of their poverty, and asked for help. nekhludoff gave them
the 60 roubles--all in small notes--which he had with him, and, terribly
sad at heart, turned home, i.e., to the foreman’s house.

the foreman met nekhludoff with a smile, and informed him that the
peasants would come to the meeting in the evening. nekhludoff thanked
him, and went straight into the garden to stroll along the paths strewn
over with the petals of apple-blossom and overgrown with weeds, and to
think over all he had seen.

at first all was quiet, but soon nekhludoff heard from behind the
foreman’s house two angry women’s voices interrupting each other, and
now and then the voice of the ever-smiling foreman. nekhludoff listened.

“my strength’s at an end. what are you about, dragging the very cross
[those baptized in the russo-greek church always wear a cross round
their necks] off my neck,” said an angry woman’s voice.

“but she only got in for a moment,” said another voice. “give it her
back, i tell you. why do you torment the beast, and the children, too,
who want their milk?”

“pay, then, or work it off,” said the foreman’s voice.

nekhludoff left the garden and entered the porch, near which stood two
dishevelled women--one of them pregnant and evidently near her time.
on one of the steps of the porch, with his hands in the pockets of his
holland coat, stood the foreman. when they saw the master, the women
were silent, and began arranging the kerchiefs on their heads, and the
foreman took his hands out of his pockets and began to smile.

this is what had happened. from the foreman’s words, it seemed that the
peasants were in the habit of letting their calves and even their cows
into the meadow belonging to the estate. two cows belonging to the
families of these two women were found in the meadow, and driven into
the yard. the foreman demanded from the women 30 copecks for each cow
or two days’ work. the women, however, maintained that the cows had got
into the meadow of their own accord; that they had no money, and asked
that the cows, which had stood in the blazing sun since morning without
food, piteously lowing, should be returned to them, even if it had to be
on the understanding that the price should be worked off later on.

“how often have i not begged of you,” said the smiling foreman, looking
back at nekhludoff as if calling upon him to be a witness, “if you drive
your cattle home at noon, that you should have an eye on them?”

“i only ran to my little one for a bit, and they got away.”

“don’t run away when you have undertaken to watch the cows.”

“and who’s to feed the little one? you’d not give him the breast, i
suppose?” said the other woman. “now, if they had really damaged the
meadow, one would not take it so much to heart; but they only strayed in
a moment.”

“all the meadows are damaged,” the foreman said, turning to nekhludoff.
“if i exact no penalty there will be no hay.”

“there, now, don’t go sinning like that; my cows have never been caught
there before,” shouted the pregnant woman.

“now that one has been caught, pay up or work it off.”

“all right, i’ll work it off; only let me have the cow now, don’t
torture her with hunger,” she cried, angrily. “as it is, i have no rest
day or night. mother-in-law is ill, husband taken to drink; i’m all
alone to do all the work, and my strength’s at an end. i wish you’d
choke, you and your working it off.”

nekhludoff asked the foreman to let the women take the cows, and went
back into the garden to go on thinking out his problem, but there was
nothing more to think about.

everything seemed so clear to him now that he could not stop wondering
how it was that everybody did not see it, and that he himself had for
such a long while not seen what was so clearly evident. the people were
dying out, and had got used to the dying-out process, and had formed
habits of life adapted to this process: there was the great mortality
among the children, the over-working of the women, the under-feeding,
especially of the aged. and so gradually had the people come to this
condition that they did not realise the full horrors of it, and did
not complain. therefore, we consider their condition natural and as it
should be. now it seemed as clear as daylight that the chief cause of
the people’s great want was one that they themselves knew and always
pointed out, i.e., that the land which alone could feed them had been
taken from them by the landlords.

and how evident it was that the children and the aged died because they
had no milk, and they had no milk because there was no pasture land, and
no land to grow corn or make hay on. it was quite evident that all the
misery of the people or, at least by far the greater part of it, was
caused by the fact that the land which should feed them was not in their
hands, but in the hands of those who, profiting by their rights to the
land, live by the work of these people. the land so much needed by men
was tilled by these people, who were on the verge of starvation, so
that the corn might be sold abroad and the owners of the land might buy
themselves hats and canes, and carriages and bronzes, etc. he understood
this as clearly as he understood that horses when they have eaten all
the grass in the inclosure where they are kept will have to grow thin
and starve unless they are put where they can get food off other land.

this was terrible, and must not go on. means must be found to alter it,
or at least not to take part in it. “and i will find them,” he thought,
as he walked up and down the path under the birch trees.

in scientific circles, government institutions, and in the papers we
talk about the causes of the poverty among the people and the means of
ameliorating their condition; but we do not talk of the only sure means
which would certainly lighten their condition, i.e., giving back to them
the land they need so much.

henry george’s fundamental position recurred vividly to his mind and how
he had once been carried away by it, and he was surprised that he could
have forgotten it. the earth cannot be any one’s property; it cannot be
bought or sold any more than water, air, or sunshine. all have an equal
right to the advantages it gives to men. and now he knew why he had felt
ashamed to remember the transaction at kousminski. he had been deceiving
himself. he knew that no man could have a right to own land, yet he had
accepted this right as his, and had given the peasants something which,
in the depth of his heart, he knew he had no right to. now he would not
act in this way, and would alter the arrangement in kousminski also. and
he formed a project in his mind to let the land to the peasants, and to
acknowledge the rent they paid for it to be their property, to be kept
to pay the taxes and for communal uses. this was, of course, not the
single-tax system, still it was as near an approach to it as could be
had under existing circumstances. his chief consideration, however, was
that in this way he would no longer profit by the possession of landed
property.

when he returned to the house the foreman, with a specially pleasant
smile, asked him if he would not have his dinner now, expressing the
fear that the feast his wife was preparing, with the help of the girl
with the earrings, might be overdone.

the table was covered with a coarse, unbleached cloth and an embroidered
towel was laid on it in lieu of a napkin. a vieux-saxe soup tureen with
a broken handle stood on the table, full of potato soup, the stock made
of the fowl that had put out and drawn in his black leg, and was now
cut, or rather chopped, in pieces, which were here and there covered
with hairs. after the soup more of the same fowl with the hairs was
served roasted, and then curd pasties, very greasy, and with a great
deal of sugar. little appetising as all this was, nekhludoff hardly
noticed what he was eating; he was occupied with the thought which had
in a moment dispersed the sadness with which he had returned from the
village.

the foreman’s wife kept looking in at the door, whilst the frightened
maid with the earrings brought in the dishes; and the foreman smiled
more and more joyfully, priding himself on his wife’s culinary skill.
after dinner, nekhludoff succeeded, with some trouble, in making the
foreman sit down. in order to revise his own thoughts, and to express
them to some one, he explained his project of letting the land to the
peasants, and asked the foreman for his opinion. the foreman, smiling
as if he had thought all this himself long ago, and was very pleased
to hear it, did not really understand it at all. this was not because
nekhludoff did not express himself clearly, but because according to
this project it turned out that nekhludoff was giving up his own
profit for the profit of others, and the thought that every one is only
concerned about his own profit, to the harm of others, was so deeply
rooted in the foreman’s conceptions that he imagined he did not
understand something when nekhludoff said that all the income from the
land must be placed to form the communal capital of the peasants.

“oh, i see; then you, of course, will receive the percentages from that
capital,” said the foreman, brightening up.

“dear me! no. don’t you see, i am giving up the land altogether.”

“but then you will not get any income,” said the foreman, smiling no
longer.

“yes, i am going to give it up.”

the foreman sighed heavily, and then began smiling again. now he
understood. he understood that nekhludoff was not quite normal, and
at once began to consider how he himself could profit by nekhludoff’s
project of giving up the land, and tried to see this project in such a
way that he might reap some advantage from it. but when he saw that this
was impossible he grew sorrowful, and the project ceased to interest
him, and he continued to smile only in order to please the master.

seeing that the foreman did not understand him, nekhludoff let him go
and sat down by the window-sill, that was all cut about and inked over,
and began to put his project down on paper.

the sun went down behind the limes, that were covered with fresh green,
and the mosquitoes swarmed in, stinging nekhludoff. just as he finished
his notes, he heard the lowing of cattle and the creaking of opening
gates from the village, and the voices of the peasants gathering
together for the meeting. he told the foreman not to call the peasants
up to the office, as he meant to go into the village himself and meet
the men where they would assemble. having hurriedly drank a cup of tea
offered him by the foreman, nekhludoff went to the village.



chapter vii.

the disinherited.

from the crowd assembled in front of the house of the village elder
came the sound of voices; but as soon as nekhludoff came up the talking
ceased, and all the peasants took off their caps, just as those in
kousminski had done. the peasants here were of a much poorer class than
those in kousminski. the men wore shoes made of bark and homespun shirts
and coats. some had come straight from their work in their shirts and
with bare feet.

nekhludoff made an effort, and began his speech by telling the peasants
of his intention to give up his land to them altogether. the peasants
were silent, and the expression on their faces did not undergo any
change.

“because i hold,” said nekhludoff, “and believe that every one has a
right to the use of the land.”

“that’s certain. that’s so, exactly,” said several voices.

nekhludoff went on to say that the revenue from the land ought to be
divided among all, and that he would therefore suggest that they
should rent the land at a price fixed by themselves, the rent to form
a communal fund for their own use. words of approval and agreement were
still to be heard, but the serious faces of the peasants grew still more
serious, and the eyes that had been fixed on the gentleman dropped, as
if they were unwilling to put him to shame by letting him see that every
one had understood his trick, and that no one would be deceived by him.

nekhludoff spoke clearly, and the peasants were intelligent, but they
did not and could not understand him, for the same reason that the
foreman had so long been unable to understand him.

they were fully convinced that it is natural for every man to consider
his own interest. the experience of many generations had proved to them
that the landlords always considered their own interest to the detriment
of the peasants. therefore, if a landlord called them to a meeting and
made them some kind of a new offer, it could evidently only be in order
to swindle them more cunningly than before.

“well, then, what are you willing to rent the land at?” asked
nekhludoff.

“how can we fix a price? we cannot do it. the land is yours, and the
power is in your hands,” answered some voices from among the crowd.

“oh, not at all. you will yourselves have the use of the money for
communal purposes.”

“we cannot do it; the commune is one thing, and this is another.”

“don’t you understand?” said the foreman, with a smile (he had followed
nekhludoff to the meeting), “the prince is letting the land to you
for money, and is giving you the money back to form a capital for the
commune.”

“we understand very well,” said a cross, toothless old man, without
raising his eyes. “something like a bank; we should have to pay at a
fixed time. we do not wish it; it is hard enough as it is, and that
would ruin us completely.”

“that’s no go. we prefer to go on the old way,” began several
dissatisfied, and even rude, voices.

the refusals grew very vehement when nekhludoff mentioned that he would
draw up an agreement which would have to be signed by him and by them.

“why sign? we shall go on working as we have done hitherto. what is all
this for? we are ignorant men.”

“we can’t agree, because this sort of thing is not what we have been
used to. as it was, so let it continue to be. only the seeds we should
like to withdraw.”

this meant that under the present arrangement the seeds had to be
provided by the peasants, and they wanted the landlord to provide them.

“then am i to understand that you refuse to accept the land?” nekhludoff
asked, addressing a middle-aged, barefooted peasant, with a tattered
coat, and a bright look on his face, who was holding his worn cap
with his left hand, in a peculiarly straight position, in the same way
soldiers hold theirs when commanded to take them off.

“just so,” said this peasant, who had evidently not yet rid himself of
the military hypnotism he had been subjected to while serving his time.

“it means that you have sufficient land,” said nekhludoff.

“no, sir, we have not,” said the ex-soldier, with an artificially
pleased look, carefully holding his tattered cap in front of him, as if
offering it to any one who liked to make use of it.

“well, anyhow, you’d better think over what i have said.” nekhludoff
spoke with surprise, and again repeated his offer.

“we have no need to think about it; as we have said, so it will be,”
 angrily muttered the morose, toothless old man.

“i shall remain here another day, and if you change your minds, send to
let me know.”

the peasants gave no answer.

so nekhludoff did not succeed in arriving at any result from this
interview.

“if i might make a remark, prince,” said the foreman, when they got
home, “you will never come to any agreement with them; they are so
obstinate. at a meeting these people just stick in one place, and there
is no moving them. it is because they are frightened of everything. why,
these very peasants--say that white-haired one, or the dark one, who
were refusing, are intelligent peasants. when one of them comes to the
office and one makes him sit down to cup of tea it’s like in the palace
of wisdom--he is quite diplomatist,” said the foreman, smiling; “he will
consider everything rightly. at a meeting it’s a different man--he keeps
repeating one and the same . . .”

“well, could not some of the more intelligent men be asked to come
here?” said nekhludoff. “i would carefully explain it to them.”

“that can be done,” said the smiling foreman.

“well, then, would you mind calling them here to-morrow?”

“oh, certainly i will,” said the foreman, and smiled still more
joyfully. “i shall call them to-morrow.”

“just hear him; he’s not artful, not he,” said a blackhaired peasant,
with an unkempt beard, as he sat jolting from side to side on a well-fed
mare, addressing an old man in a torn coat who rode by his side. the two
men were driving a herd of the peasants’ horses to graze in the night,
alongside the highroad and secretly, in the landlord’s forest.

“give you the land for nothing--you need only sign--have they not
done the likes of us often enough? no, my friend, none of your humbug.
nowadays we have a little sense,” he added, and began shouting at a colt
that had strayed.

he stopped his horse and looked round, but the colt had not remained
behind; it had gone into the meadow by the roadside. “bother that son
of a turk; he’s taken to getting into the landowner’s meadows,” said the
dark peasant with the unkempt beard, hearing the cracking of the sorrel
stalks that the neighing colt was galloping over as he came running back
from the scented meadow.

“do you hear the cracking? we’ll have to send the women folk to weed
the meadow when there’s a holiday,” said the thin peasant with the torn
coat, “or else we’ll blunt our scythes.”

“sign,” he says. the unkempt man continued giving his opinion of the
landlord’s speech. “‘sign,’ indeed, and let him swallow you up.”

“that’s certain,” answered the old man. and then they were silent, and
the tramping of the horses’ feet along the highroad was the only sound
to be heard.



chapter viii.

god’s peace in the heart.

when nekhludoff returned he found that the office had been arranged as
a bedroom for him. a high bedstead, with a feather bed and two large
pillows, had been placed in the room. the bed was covered with a dark
red doublebedded silk quilt, which was elaborately and finely quilted,
and very stiff. it evidently belonged to the trousseau of the foreman’s
wife. the foreman offered nekhludoff the remains of the dinner, which
the latter refused, and, excusing himself for the poorness of the fare
and the accommodation, he left nekhludoff alone.

the peasants’ refusal did not at all bother nekhludoff. on the contrary,
though at kousminski his offer had been accepted and he had even been
thanked for it, and here he was met with suspicion and even enmity, he
felt contented and joyful.

it was close and dirty in the office. nekhludoff went out into the yard,
and was going into the garden, but he remembered: that night, the window
of the maid-servant’s room, the side porch, and he felt uncomfortable,
and did not like to pass the spot desecrated by guilty memories. he
sat down on the doorstep, and breathing in the warm air, balmy with the
strong scent of fresh birch leaves, he sat for a long time looking into
the dark garden and listening to the mill, the nightingales, and some
other bird that whistled monotonously in the bush close by. the light
disappeared from the foreman’s window; in the cast, behind the barn,
appeared the light of the rising moon, and sheet lightning began to
light up the dilapidated house, and the blooming, over-grown garden more
and more frequently. it began to thunder in the distance, and a black
cloud spread over one-third of the sky. the nightingales and the other
birds were silent. above the murmur of the water from the mill came the
cackling of geese, and then in the village and in the foreman’s yard
the first cocks began to crow earlier than usual, as they do on warm,
thundery nights. there is a saying that if the cocks crow early the
night will be a merry one. for nekhludoff the night was more than merry;
it was a happy, joyful night. imagination renewed the impressions of
that happy summer which he had spent here as an innocent lad, and he
felt himself as he had been not only at that but at all the best moments
of his life. he not only remembered but felt as he had felt when, at
the age of 14, he prayed that god would show him the truth; or when as
a child he had wept on his mother’s lap, when parting from her, and
promising to be always good, and never give her pain; he felt as he did
when he and nikolenka irtenieff resolved always to support each other in
living a good life and to try to make everybody happy.

he remembered how he had been tempted in kousminski, so that he had
begun to regret the house and the forest and the farm and the land, and
he asked himself if he regretted them now, and it even seemed strange to
think that he could regret them. he remembered all he had seen to-day;
the woman with the children, and without her husband, who was in prison
for having cut down trees in his (nekhludoff’s) forest, and the terrible
matrona, who considered, or at least talked as if she considered,
that women of her position must give themselves to the gentlefolk; he
remembered her relation to the babies, the way in which they were taken
to the foundlings’ hospital, and the unfortunate, smiling, wizened
baby with the patchwork cap, dying of starvation. and then he suddenly
remembered the prison, the shaved heads, the cells, the disgusting
smells, the chains, and, by the side of it all, the madly lavish city
lift of the rich, himself included.

the bright moon, now almost full, rose above the barn. dark shadows fell
across the yard, and the iron roof of the ruined house shone bright.
as if unwilling to waste this light, the nightingales again began their
trills.

nekhludoff called to mind how he had begun to consider his life in
the garden of kousminski when deciding what he was going to do, and
remembered how confused he had become, how he could not arrive at any
decision, how many difficulties each question had presented. he asked
himself these questions now, and was surprised how simple it all was. it
was simple because he was not thinking now of what would be the results
for himself, but only thought of what he had to do. and, strange to say,
what he had to do for himself he could not decide, but what he had to do
for others he knew without any doubt. he had no doubt that he must
not leave katusha, but go on helping her. he had no doubt that he must
study, investigate, clear up, understand all this business concerning
judgment and punishment, which he felt he saw differently to other
people. what would result from it all he did not know, but he knew for
certain that he must do it. and this firm assurance gave him joy.

the black cloud had spread all over the sky; the lightning flashed
vividly across the yard and the old house with its tumble-down porches,
the thunder growled overhead. all the birds were silent, but the leaves
rustled and the wind reached the step where nekhludoff stood and played
with his hair. one drop came down, then another; then they came drumming
on the dock leaves and on the iron of the roof, and all the air was
filled by a bright flash, and before nekhludoff could count three a
fearful crash sounded over head and spread pealing all over the sky.

nekhludoff went in.

“yes, yes,” he thought. “the work that our life accomplishes, the whole
of this work, the meaning of it is not, nor can be, intelligible to
me. what were my aunts for? why did nikolenka irtenieff die? why am
i living? what was katusha for? and my madness? why that war? why my
subsequent lawless life? to understand it, to understand the whole
of the master’s will is not in my power. but to do his will, that is
written down in my conscience, is in my power; that i know for certain.
and when i am fulfilling it i have sureness and peace.”

the rain came down in torrents and rushed from the roof into a tub
beneath; the lightning lit up the house and yard less frequently.
nekhludoff went into his room, undressed, and lay down, not without
fear of the bugs, whose presence the dirty, torn wall-papers made him
suspect.

“yes, to feel one’s self not the master but a servant,” he thought, and
rejoiced at the thought. his fears were not vain. hardly had he put out
his candle when the vermin attacked and stung him. “to give up the land
and go to siberia. fleas, bugs, dirt! ah, well; if it must be borne, i
shall bear it.” but, in spite of the best of intentions, he could not
bear it, and sat down by the open window and gazed with admiration at
the retreating clouds and the reappearing moon.



chapter ix.

the land settlement.

it was morning before nekhludoff could fall asleep, and therefore he
woke up late. at noon seven men, chosen from among the peasants at
the foreman’s invitation, came into the orchard, where the foreman
had arranged a table and benches by digging posts into the ground,
and fixing boards on the top, under the apple trees. it took some time
before the peasants could be persuaded to put on their caps and to sit
down on the benches. especially firm was the ex-soldier, who to-day had
bark shoes on. he stood erect, holding his cap as they do at
funerals, according to military regulation. when one of them, a
respectable-looking, broad-shouldered old man, with a curly, grizzly
beard like that of michael angelo’s “moses,” and grey hair that curled
round the brown, bald forehead, put on his big cap, and, wrapping his
coat round him, got in behind the table and sat down, the rest followed
his example. when all had taken their places nekhludoff sat down
opposite them, and leaning on the table over the paper on which he had
drawn up his project, he began explaining it.

whether it was that there were fewer present, or that he was occupied
with the business in hand and not with himself, anyhow, this
time nekhludoff felt no confusion. he involuntarily addressed the
broad-shouldered old man with white ringlets in his grizzly beard,
expecting approbation or objections from him. but nekhludoff’s
conjecture was wrong. the respectable-looking old patriarch, though he
nodded his handsome head approvingly or shook it, and frowned when the
others raised an objection, evidently understood with great difficulty,
and only when the others repeated what nekhludoff had said in their own
words. a little, almost beardless old fellow, blind in one eye, who sat
by the side of the patriarch, and had a patched nankeen coat and old
boots on, and, as nekhludoff found out later, was an oven-builder,
understood much better. this man moved his brows quickly, attending to
nekhludoff’s words with an effort, and at once repeated them in his
own way. an old, thick-set man with a white beard and intelligent eyes
understood as quickly, and took every opportunity to put in an ironical
joke, clearly wishing to show off. the ex-soldier seemed also to
understand matters, but got mixed, being used to senseless soldiers’
talk. a tall man with a small beard, a long nose, and a bass voice, who
wore clean, home-made clothes and new bark-plaited shoes, seemed to be
the one most seriously interested. this man spoke only when there
was need of it. the two other old men, the same toothless one who
had shouted a distinct refusal at the meeting the day before to every
proposal of nekhludoff’s, and a tall, white lame old man with a kind
face, his thin legs tightly wrapped round with strips of linen, said
little, though they listened attentively. first of all nekhludoff
explained his views in regard to personal property in land. “the land,
according to my idea, can neither be bought nor sold, because if it
could be, he who has got the money could buy it all, and exact anything
he liked for the use of the land from those who have none.”

“that’s true,” said the long-nosed man, in a deep bass.

“just so,” said the ex-soldier.

“a woman gathers a little grass for her cow; she’s caught and
imprisoned,” said the white-bearded old man.

“our own land is five versts away, and as to renting any it’s
impossible; the price is raised so high that it won’t pay,” added the
cross, toothless old man. “they twist us into ropes, worse than during
serfdom.”

“i think as you do, and i count it a sin to possess land, so i wish to
give it away,” said nekhludoff.

“well, that’s a good thing,” said the old man, with curls like angelo’s
“moses,” evidently thinking that nekhludoff meant to let the land.

“i have come here because i no longer wish to possess any land, and now
we must consider the best way of dividing it.”

“just give it to the peasants, that’s all,” said the cross, toothless
old man.

nekhludoff was abashed for a moment, feeling a suspicion of his not
being honest in these words, but he instantly recovered, and made use of
the remark, in order to express what was in his mind, in reply.

“i should be glad to give it them,” he said, “but to whom, and how?
to which of the peasants? why, to your commune, and not to that of
deminsk.” (that was the name of a neighbouring village with very little
land.) all were silent. then the ex-soldier said, “just so.”

“now, then, tell me how would you divide the land among the peasants if
you had to do it?” said nekhludoff.

“we should divide it up equally, so much for every man,” said the
oven-builder, quickly raising and lowering his brows.

“how else? of course, so much per man,” said the good natured lame man
with the white strips of linen round his legs.

every one confirmed this statement, considering it satisfactory.

“so much per man? then are the servants attached to the house also to
have a share?” nekhludoff asked.

“oh, no,” said the ex-soldier, trying to appear bold and merry. but the
tall, reasonable man would not agree with him.

“if one is to divide, all must share alike,” he said, in his deep bass,
after a little consideration.

“it can’t be done,” said nekhludoff, who had already prepared his reply.
“if all are to share alike, then those who do not work themselves--do
not plough--will sell their shares to the rich. the rich will again get
at the land. those who live by working the land will multiply, and land
will again be scarce. then the rich will again get those who need land
into their power.”

“just so,” quickly said the ex-soldier.

“forbid to sell the land; let only him who ploughs it have it,” angrily
interrupted the oven-builder.

to this nekhludoff replied that it was impossible to know who was
ploughing for himself and who for another.

the tall, reasonable man proposed that an arrangement be made so that
they should all plough communally, and those who ploughed should get the
produce and those who did not should get nothing.

to this communistic project nekhludoff had also an answer ready. he said
that for such an arrangement it would be necessary that all should have
ploughs, and that all the horses should be alike, so that none should
be left behind, and that ploughs and horses and all the implements would
have to be communal property, and that in order to get that, all the
people would have to agree.

“our people could not be made to agree in a lifetime,” said the cross
old man.

“we should have regular fights,” said the white-bearded old man with the
laughing eyes. “so that the thing is not as simple as it looks,”
 said nekhludoff, “and this is a thing not only we but many have been
considering. there is an american, henry george. this is what he has
thought out, and i agree with him.”

“why, you are the master, and you give it as you like. what’s it to you?
the power is yours,” said the cross old man.

this confused nekhludoff, but he was pleased to see that not he alone
was dissatisfied with this interruption.

“you wait a bit, uncle simon; let him tell us about it,” said the
reasonable man, in his imposing bass.

this emboldened nekhludoff, and he began to explain henry george’s
single-tax system “the earth is no man’s; it is god’s,” he began.

“just so; that it is,” several voices replied.

“the land is common to all. all have the same right to it, but there is
good land and bad land, and every one would like to take the good land.
how is one to do in order to get it justly divided? in this way: he that
will use the good land must pay those who have got no land the value of
the land he uses,” nekhludoff went on, answering his own question. “as
it would be difficult to say who should pay whom, and money is needed
for communal use, it should be arranged that he who uses the good land
should pay the amount of the value of his land to the commune for its
needs. then every one would share equally. if you want to use land pay
for it--more for the good, less for the bad land. if you do not wish to
use land, don’t pay anything, and those who use the land will pay the
taxes and the communal expenses for you.”

“well, he had a head, this george,” said the oven-builder, moving his
brows. “he who has good land must pay more.”

“if only the payment is according to our strength,” said the tall man
with the bass voice, evidently foreseeing how the matter would end.

“the payment should be not too high and not too low. if it is too high
it will not get paid, and there will be a loss; and if it is too low it
will be bought and sold. there would be a trading in land. this is what
i wished to arrange among you here.”

“that is just, that is right; yes, that would do,” said the peasants.

“he has a head, this george,” said the broad-shouldered old man with the
curls. “see what he has invented.”

“well, then, how would it be if i wished to take some land?” asked the
smiling foreman.

“if there is an allotment to spare, take it and work it,” said
nekhludoff.

“what do you want it for? you have sufficient as it is,” said the old
man with the laughing eyes.

with this the conference ended.

nekhludoff repeated his offer, and advised the men to talk it over with
the rest of the commune and to return with the answer.

the peasants said they would talk it over and bring an answer, and left
in a state of excitement. their loud talk was audible as they went along
the road, and up to late in the night the sound of voices came along the
river from the village.

the next day the peasants did not go to work, but spent it in
considering the landlord’s offer. the commune was divided into two
parties--one which regarded the offer as a profitable one to themselves
and saw no danger in agreeing with it, and another which suspected and
feared the offer it did not understand. on the third day, however, all
agreed, and some were sent to nekhludoff to accept his offer. they were
influenced in their decision by the explanation some of the old men gave
of the landlord’s conduct, which did away with all fear of deceit. they
thought the gentleman had begun to consider his soul, and was acting as
he did for its salvation. the alms which nekhludoff had given away while
in panovo made his explanation seem likely. the fact that nekhludoff
had never before been face to face with such great poverty and so bare
a life as the peasants had come to in this place, and was so appalled
by it, made him give away money in charity, though he knew that this was
not reasonable. he could not help giving the money, of which he now had
a great deal, having received a large sum for the forest he had sold
the year before, and also the hand money for the implements and stock in
kousminski. as soon as it was known that the master was giving money in
charity, crowds of people, chiefly women, began to come to ask him for
help. he did not in the least know how to deal with them, how to decide,
how much, and whom to give to. he felt that to refuse to give money, of
which he had a great deal, to poor people was impossible, yet to give
casually to those who asked was not wise. the last day he spent in
panovo, nekhludoff looked over the things left in his aunts’ house, and
in the bottom drawer of the mahogany wardrobe, with the brass lions’
heads with rings through them, he found many letters, and amongst them a
photograph of a group, consisting of his aunts, sophia ivanovna and mary
ivanovna, a student, and katusha. of all the things in the house he took
only the letters and the photograph. the rest he left to the miller who,
at the smiling foreman’s recommendation, had bought the house and all it
contained, to be taken down and carried away, at one-tenth of the real
value.

recalling the feeling of regret at the loss of his property which he had
felt in kousminski, nekhludoff was surprised how he could have felt this
regret. now he felt nothing but unceasing joy at the deliverance, and
a sensation of newness something like that which a traveller must
experience when discovering new countries.



chapter x.

nekhludoff returns to town.

the town struck nekhludoff in a new and peculiar light on his return.
he came back in the evening, when the gas was lit, and drove from
the railway station to his house, where the rooms still smelt of
naphthaline. agraphena petrovna and corney were both feeling tired and
dissatisfied, and had even had a quarrel over those things that seemed
made only to be aired and packed away. nekhludoff’s room was empty, but
not in order, and the way to it was blocked up with boxes, so that his
arrival evidently hindered the business which, owing to a curious kind
of inertia, was going on in this house. the evident folly of these
proceedings, in which he had once taken part, was so distasteful to
nekhludoff after the impressions the misery of the life of the peasants
had made on him, that he decided to go to a hotel the next day, leaving
agraphena petrovna to put away the things as she thought fit until his
sister should come and finally dispose of everything in the house.

nekhludoff left home early and chose a couple of rooms in a very modest
and not particularly clean lodging-house within easy reach of the
prison, and, having given orders that some of his things should be sent
there, he went to see the advocate. it was cold out of doors. after some
rainy and stormy weather it had turned out cold, as it often does in
spring. it was so cold that nekhludoff felt quite chilly in his light
overcoat, and walked fast hoping to get warmer. his mind was filled
with thoughts of the peasants, the women, children, old men, and all the
poverty and weariness which he seemed to have seen for the first time,
especially the smiling, old-faced infant writhing with his calfless
little legs, and he could not help contrasting what was going on in the
town. passing by the butchers’, fishmongers’, and clothiers’ shops, he
was struck, as if he saw them for the first time, by the appearance
of the clean, well-fed shopkeepers, like whom you could not find one
peasant in the country. these men were apparently convinced that the
pains they took to deceive the people who did not know much about their
goods was not a useless but rather an important business. the coachmen
with their broad hips and rows of buttons down their sides, and the
door-keepers with gold cords on their caps, the servant-girls with their
aprons and curly fringes, and especially the smart isvostchiks with
the nape of their necks clean shaved, as they sat lolling back in their
traps, and examined the passers-by with dissolute and contemptuous
air, looked well fed. in all these people nekhludoff could not now help
seeing some of these very peasants who had been driven into the town by
lack of land. some of the peasants driven to the town had found means
of profiting by the conditions of town life and had become like the
gentlefolk and were pleased with their position; others were in a worse
position than they had been in the country and were more to be pitied
than the country people.

such seemed the bootmakers nekhludoff saw in the cellar, the pale,
dishevelled washerwomen with their thin, bare, arms ironing at an open
window, out of which streamed soapy steam; such the two house-painters
with their aprons, stockingless feet, all bespattered and smeared with
paint, whom nekhludoff met--their weak, brown arms bared to above the
elbows--carrying a pailful of paint, and quarrelling with each other.
their faces looked haggard and cross. the dark faces of the carters
jolting along in their carts bore the same expression, and so did the
faces of the tattered men and women who stood begging at the street
corners. the same kind of faces were to be seen at the open, windows of
the eating-houses which nekhludoff passed. by the dirty tables on which
stood tea things and bottles, and between which waiters dressed in white
shirts were rushing hither and thither, sat shouting and singing red,
perspiring men with stupefied faces. one sat by the window with
lifted brows and pouting lips and fixed eyes as if trying to remember
something.

“and why are they all gathered here?” nekhludoff thought, breathing
in together with the dust which the cold wind blew towards him the air
filled with the smell of rank oil and fresh paint.

in one street he met a row of carts loaded with something made of iron,
that rattled so on the uneven pavement that it made his ears and head
ache. he started walking still faster in order to pass the row of carts,
when he heard himself called by name. he stopped and saw an officer with
sharp pointed moustaches and shining face who sat in the trap of a swell
isvostchik and waved his hand in a friendly manner, his smile disclosing
unusually long, white teeth.

“nekhludoff! can it be you?”

nekhludoff’s first feeling was one of pleasure. “ah, schonbock!” he
exclaimed joyfully; but he knew the next moment that there was nothing
to be joyful about.

this was that schonbock who had been in the house of nekhludoff’s aunts
that day, and whom nekhludoff had quite lost out of sight, but about
whom he had heard that in spite of his debts he had somehow managed to
remain in the cavalry, and by some means or other still kept his place
among the rich. his gay, contented appearance corroborated this report.

“what a good thing that i have caught you. there is no one in town. ah,
old fellow; you have grown old,” he said, getting out of the trap and
moving his shoulders about. “i only knew you by your walk. look here, we
must dine together. is there any place where they feed one decently?”

“i don’t think i can spare the time,” nekhludoff answered, thinking only
of how he could best get rid of his companion without hurting him.

“and what has brought you here?” he asked.

“business, old fellow. guardianship business. i am a guardian now. i am
managing samanoff’s affairs--the millionaire, you know. he has softening
of the brain, and he’s got fifty-four thousand desiatins of land,”
 he said, with peculiar pride, as if he had himself made all these
desiatins. “the affairs were terribly neglected. all the land was let
to the peasants. they did not pay anything. there were more than eighty
thousand roubles debts. i changed it all in one year, and have got 70
per cent. more out of it. what do you think of that?” he asked proudly.

nekhludoff remembered having heard that this schonbock, just because, he
had spent all he had, had attained by some special influence the post of
guardian to a rich old man who was squandering his property--and was now
evidently living by this guardianship.

“how am i to get rid of him without offending him?” thought nekhludoff,
looking at this full, shiny face with the stiffened moustache and
listening to his friendly, good-humoured chatter about where one gets
fed best, and his bragging about his doings as a guardian.

“well, then, where do we dine?”

“really, i have no time to spare,” said nekhludoff, glancing at his
watch.

“then, look here. to-night, at the races--will you be there?”

“no, i shall not be there.”

“do come. i have none of my own now, but i back grisha’s horses. you
remember; he has a fine stud. you’ll come, won’t you? and we’ll have
some supper together.”

“no, i cannot have supper with you either,” said nekhludoff with a
smile.

“well, that’s too bad! and where are you off to now? shall i give you a
lift?”

“i am going to see an advocate, close to here round the corner.”

“oh, yes, of course. you have got something to do with the prisons--have
turned into a prisoners’ mediator, i hear,” said schonbock, laughing.
“the korchagins told me. they have left town already. what does it all
mean? tell me.”

“yes, yes, it is quite true,” nekhludoff answered; “but i cannot tell
you about it in the street.”

“of course; you always were a crank. but you will come to the races?”

“no. i neither can nor wish to come. please do not be angry with me.”

“angry? dear me, no. where do you live?” and suddenly his face became
serious, his eyes fixed, and he drew up his brows. he seemed to be
trying to remember something, and nekhludoff noticed the same dull
expression as that of the man with the raised brows and pouting lips
whom he had seen at the window of the eating-house.

“how cold it is! is it not? have you got the parcels?” said schonbock,
turning to the isvostchik.

“all right. good-bye. i am very glad indeed to have met you,” and
warmly pressing nekhludoff’s hand, he jumped into the trap and waved
his white-gloved hand in front of his shiny face, with his usual smile,
showing his exceptionally white teeth.

“can i have also been like that?” nekhludoff thought, as he continued
his way to the advocate’s. “yes, i wished to be like that, though i was
not quite like it. and i thought of living my life in that way.”



chapter xi.

an advocate’s views on judges and prosecutors.

nekhludoff was admitted by the advocate before his turn. the advocate at
once commenced to talk about the menshoffs’ case, which he had read with
indignation at the inconsistency of the accusation.

“this case is perfectly revolting,” he said; “it is very likely that
the owner himself set fire to the building in order to get the insurance
money, and the chief thing is that there is no evidence to prove the
menshoffs’ guilt. there are no proofs whatever. it is all owing to the
special zeal of the examining magistrate and the carelessness of the
prosecutor. if they are tried here, and not in a provincial court, i
guarantee that they will be acquitted, and i shall charge nothing.
now then, the next case, that of theodosia birukoff. the appeal to the
emperor is written. if you go to petersburg, you’d better take it with
you, and hand it in yourself, with a request of your own, or else they
will only make a few inquiries, and nothing will come of it. you must
try and get at some of the influential members of the appeal committee.”

“well, is this all?”

“no; here i have a letter . . . i see you have turned into a pipe--a
spout through which all the complaints of the prison are poured,” said
the advocate, with a smile. “it is too much; you’ll not be able to
manage it.”

“no, but this is a striking case,” said nekhludoff, and gave a brief
outline of the case of a peasant who began to read the gospels to the
peasants in the village, and to discuss them with his friends. the
priests regarded this as a crime and informed the authorities. the
magistrate examined him and the public prosecutor drew up an act of
indictment, and the law courts committed him for trial.

“this is really too terrible,” nekhludoff said. “can it be true?”

“what are you surprised at?”

“why, everything. i can understand the police-officer, who simply obeys
orders, but the prosecutor drawing up an act of that kind. an educated
man . . .”

“that is where the mistake lies, that we are in the habit of considering
that the prosecutors and the judges in general are some kind of liberal
persons. there was a time when they were such, but now it is quite
different. they are just officials, only troubled about pay-day.
they receive their salaries and want them increased, and there their
principles end. they will accuse, judge, and sentence any one you like.”

“yes; but do laws really exist that can condemn a man to siberia for
reading the bible with his friends?”

“not only to be exiled to the less remote parts of siberia, but even to
the mines, if you can only prove that reading the bible they took the
liberty of explaining it to others not according to orders, and in this
way condemned the explanations given by the church. blaming the greek
orthodox religion in the presence of the common people means, according
to statute . . . the mines.”

“impossible!”

“i assure you it is so. i always tell these gentlemen, the judges,”
 the advocate continued, “that i cannot look at them without gratitude,
because if i am not in prison, and you, and all of us, it is only owing
to their kindness. to deprive us of our privileges, and send us all to
the less remote parts of siberia, would be an easy thing for them.”

“well, if it is so, and if everything depends on the procureur and
others who can, at will, either enforce the laws or not, what are the
trials for?”

the advocate burst into a merry laugh. “you do put strange questions.
my dear sir, that is philosophy. well, we might have a talk about that,
too. could you come on saturday? you will meet men of science, literary
men, and artists at my house, and then we might discuss these general
questions,” said the advocate, pronouncing the words “general questions”
 with ironical pathos. “you have met my wife? do come.”

“thank you; i will try to,” said nekhludoff, and felt that he was saying
an untruth, and knew that if he tried to do anything it would be to keep
away froth the advocate’s literary evening, and the circle of the men of
science, art, and literature.

the laugh with which the advocate met nekhludoff’s remark that trials
could have no meaning if the judges might enforce the laws or not,
according to their notion, and the tone with which he pronounced the
words “philosophy” and “general questions” proved to nekhludoff how very
differently he and the advocate and, probably, the advocate’s friends,
looked at things; and he felt that in spite of the distance that now
existed between himself and his former companions, schonbock, etc.,
the difference between himself and the circle of the advocate and his
friends was still greater.



chapter xii.

why the peasants flock to town.

the prison was a long way off and it was getting late, so nekhludoff
took an isvostchik. the isvostchik, a middle-aged man with an
intelligent and kind face, turned round towards nekhludoff as they were
driving along one of the streets and pointed to a huge house that was
being built there.

“just see what a tremendous house they have begun to build,” he said, as
if he was partly responsible for the building of the house and proud of
it. the house was really immense and was being built in a very original
style. the strong pine beams of the scaffolding were firmly fixed
together with iron bands and a plank wall separated the building from
the street.

on the boards of the scaffolding workmen, all bespattered with plaster,
moved hither and thither like ants. some were laying bricks, some hewing
stones, some carrying up the heavy hods and pails and bringing them down
empty. a fat and finely-dressed gentleman--probably the architect--stood
by the scaffolding, pointing upward and explaining something to a
contractor, a peasant from the vladimir government, who was respectfully
listening to him. empty carts were coming out of the gate by which the
architect and the contractor were standing, and loaded ones were going
in. “and how sure they all are--those that do the work as well as those
that make them do it--that it ought to be; that while their wives at
home, who are with child, are labouring beyond their strength, and their
children with the patchwork caps, doomed soon to the cold grave, smile
with suffering and contort their little legs, they must be building this
stupid and useless palace for some stupid and useless person--one of
those who spoil and rob them,” nekhludoff thought, while looking at the
house.

“yes, it is a stupid house,” he said, uttering his thought out aloud.

“why stupid?” replied the isvostchik, in an offended tone. “thanks to
it, the people get work; it’s not stupid.”

“but the work is useless.”

“it can’t be useless, or why should it be done?” said the isvostchik.
“the people get bread by it.”

nekhludoff was silent, and it would have been difficult to talk because
of the clatter the wheels made.

when they came nearer the prison, and the isvostchik turned off the
paved on to the macadamised road, it became easier to talk, and he again
turned to nekhludoff.

“and what a lot of these people are flocking to the town nowadays; it’s
awful,” he said, turning round on the box and pointing to a party of
peasant workmen who were coming towards them, carrying saws, axes,
sheepskins, coats, and bags strapped to their shoulders.

“more than in other years?” nekhludoff asked.

“by far. this year every place is crowded, so that it’s just terrible.
the employers just fling the workmen about like chaff. not a job to be
got.”

“why is that?”

“they’ve increased. there’s no room for them.”

“well, what if they have increased? why do not they stay in the
village?”

“there’s nothing for them to do in the village--no land to be had.”

nekhludoff felt as one does when touching a sore place. it feels as if
the bruised part was always being hit; yet it is only because the place
is sore that the touch is felt.

“is it possible that the same thing is happening everywhere?” he
thought, and began questioning the isvostchik about the quantity of land
in his village, how much land the man himself had, and why he had left
the country.

“we have a desiatin per man, sir,” he said. “our family have three men’s
shares of the land. my father and a brother are at home, and manage the
land, and another brother is serving in the army. but there’s nothing to
manage. my brother has had thoughts of coming to moscow, too.”

“and cannot land be rented?”

“how’s one to rent it nowadays? the gentry, such as they were, have
squandered all theirs. men of business have got it all into their own
hands. one can’t rent it from them. they farm it themselves. we have
a frenchman ruling in our place; he bought the estate from our former
landlord, and won’t let it--and there’s an end of it.”

“who’s that frenchman?”

“dufour is the frenchman’s name. perhaps you’ve heard of him. he makes
wigs for the actors in the big theatre; it is a good business, so he’s
prospering. he bought it from our lady, the whole of the estate, and now
he has us in his power; he just rides on us as he pleases. the lord be
thanked, he is a good man himself; only his wife, a russian, is such a
brute that--god have mercy on us. she robs the people. it’s awful. well,
here’s the prison. am i to drive you to the entrance? i’m afraid they’ll
not let us do it, though.”



chapter xiii.

nurse maslova.

when he rang the bell at the front entrance nekhludoff’s heart stood
still with horror as he thought of the state he might find maslova in
to-day, and at the mystery that he felt to be in her and in the people
that were collected in the prison. he asked the jailer who opened the
door for maslova. after making the necessary inquiry the jailer informed
him that she was in the hospital. nekhludoff went there. a kindly old
man, the hospital doorkeeper, let him in at once and, after asking
nekhludoff whom he wanted, directed him to the children’s ward. a young
doctor saturated with carbolic acid met nekhludoff in the passage and
asked him severely what he wanted. this doctor was always making all
sorts of concessions to the prisoners, and was therefore continually
coming into conflict with the prison authorities and even with the head
doctor. fearing lest nekhludoff should demand something unlawful, and
wishing to show that he made no exceptions for any one, he pretended to
be cross. “there are no women here; it is the children’s ward,” he said.

“yes, i know; but a prisoner has been removed here to be an assistant
nurse.”

“yes, there are two such here. then whom do you want?”

“i am closely connected with one of them, named maslova,” nekhludoff
answered, “and should like to speak to her. i am going to petersburg to
hand in an appeal to the senate about her case and should like to give
her this. it is only a photo,” nekhludoff said, taking an envelope out
of his pocket.

“all right, you may do that,” said the doctor, relenting, and turning to
an old woman with a white apron, he told her to call the prisoner--nurse
maslova.

“will you take a seat, or go into the waiting-room?”

“thanks,” said nekhludoff, and profiting by the favourable change in
the manner of the doctor towards him asked how they were satisfied with
maslova in the hospital.

“oh, she is all right. she works fairly well, if you the conditions of
her former life into account. but here she is.”

the old nurse came in at one of the doors, followed by maslova, who wore
a blue striped dress, a white apron, a kerchief that quite covered her
hair. when she saw nekhludoff her face flushed, and she stopped as if
hesitating, then frowned, and with downcast eyes went quickly towards
him along the strip of carpet in the middle of the passage. when she
came up to nekhludoff she did not wish to give him her hand, and then
gave it, growing redder still. nekhludoff had not seen her since the
day when she begged forgiveness for having been in a passion, and he
expected to find her the same as she was then. but to-day she was
quite different. there was something new in the expression of her face,
reserve and shyness, and, as it seemed to him, animosity towards him. he
told her what he had already said to the doctor, i.e., that he was going
to petersburg, and he handed her the envelope with the photograph which
he had brought from panovo.

“i found this in panovo--it’s an old photo; perhaps you would like it.
take it.”

lifting her dark eyebrows, she looked at him with surprise in her
squinting eyes, as if asking, “what is this for?” took the photo
silently and put it in the bib of her apron.

“i saw your aunt there,” said nekhludoff.

“did you?” she said, indifferently.

“are you all right here?” nekhludoff asked.

“oh, yes, it’s all right,” she said.

“not too difficult?”

“oh, no. but i am not used to it yet.”

“i am glad, for your sake. anyhow, it is better than there.”

“than where--there?” she asked, her face flushing again.

“there--in the prison,” nekhludoff hurriedly answered.

“why better?” she asked.

“i think the people are better. here are none such as there must be
there.”

“there are many good ones there,” she said.

“i have been seeing about the menshoffs, and hope they will be
liberated,” said nekhludoff.

“god grant they may. such a splendid old woman,” she said, again
repeating her opinion of the old woman, and slightly smiling.

“i am going to petersburg to-day. your case will come on soon, and i
hope the sentence will be repealed.”

“whether it is repealed or not won’t matter now,” she said.

“why not now?”

“so,” she said, looking with a quick, questioning glance into his eyes.

nekhludoff understood the word and the look to mean that she wished
to know whether he still kept firm to his decision or had accepted her
refusal.

“i do not know why it does not matter to you,” he said. “it certainly
does not matter as far as i am concerned whether you are acquitted or
not. i am ready to do what i told you in any case,” he said decidedly.

she lifted her head and her black squinting eyes remained fixed on him
and beyond him, and her face beamed with joy. but the words she spoke
were very different from what her eyes said.

“you should not speak like that,” she said.

“i am saying it so that you should know.”

“everything has been said about that, and there is no use speaking,” she
said, with difficulty repressing a smile.

a sudden noise came from the hospital ward, and the sound of a child
crying.

“i think they are calling me,” she said, and looked round uneasily.

“well, good-bye, then,” he said. she pretended not to see his extended
hand, and, without taking it, turned away and hastily walked along the
strip of carpet, trying to hide the triumph she felt.

“what is going on in her? what is she thinking? what does she feel? does
she mean to prove me, or can she really not forgive me? is it that she
cannot or that she will not express what she feels and thinks? has she
softened or hardened?” he asked himself, and could find no answer. he
only knew that she had altered and that an important change was going on
in her soul, and this change united him not only to her but also to him
for whose sake that change was being wrought. and this union brought on
a state of joyful animation and tenderness.

when she returned to the ward, in which there stood eight small beds,
maslova began, in obedience to the nurse’s order, to arrange one of the
beds; and, bending over too far with the sheet, she slipped and nearly
fell down.

a little convalescent boy with a bandaged neck, who was looking at her,
laughed. maslova could no longer contain herself and burst into loud
laughter, and such contagious laughter that several of the children also
burst out laughing, and one of the sisters rebuked her angrily.

“what are you giggling at? do you think you are where you used to be?
go and fetch the food.” maslova obeyed and went where she was sent; but,
catching the eye of the bandaged boy who was not allowed to laugh, she
again burst out laughing.

whenever she was alone maslova again and again pulled the photograph
partly out of the envelope and looked at it admiringly; but only in the
evening when she was off duty and alone in the bedroom which she shared
with a nurse, did she take it quite out of the envelope and gaze long
at the faded yellow photograph, caressing with, her eyes every detail
of faces and clothing, the steps of the veranda, and the bushes which
served as a background to his and hers and his aunts’ faces, and could
not cease from admiring especially herself--her pretty young face with
the curly hair round the forehead. she was so absorbed that she did not
hear her fellow-nurse come into the room.

“what is it that he’s given you?” said the good-natured, fat nurse,
stooping over the photograph.

“who’s this? you?”

“who else?” said maslova, looking into her companion’s face with a
smile.

“and who’s this?”

“himself.”

“and is this his mother?”

“no, his aunt. would you not have known me?”

“never. the whole face is altered. why, it must be 10 years since then.”

“not years, but a lifetime,” said maslova. and suddenly her animation
went, her face grew gloomy, and a deep line appeared between her brows.

“why so? your way of life must have been an easy one.”

“easy, indeed,” maslova reiterated, closing her eyes and shaking her
head. “it is hell.”

“why, what makes it so?”

“what makes it so! from eight till four in the morning, and every night
the same!”

“then why don’t they give it up?”

“they can’t give it up if they want to. but what’s the use of talking?”
 maslova said, jumping up and throwing the photograph into the drawer of
the table. and with difficulty repressing angry tears, she ran out into
the passage and slammed the door.

while looking at the group she imagined herself such as she was there
and dreamt of her happiness then and of the possibility of happiness
with him now. but her companion’s words reminded her of what she was now
and what she had been, and brought back all the horrors of that life,
which she had felt but dimly, and not allowed herself to realise.

it was only now that the memory of all those terrible nights came
vividly back to her, especially one during the carnival when she was
expecting a student who had promised to buy her out. she remembered how
she--wearing her low necked silk dress stained with wine, a red bow in
her untidy hair, wearied, weak, half tipsy, having seen her visitors
off, sat down during an interval in the dancing by the piano beside the
bony pianiste with the blotchy face, who played the accompaniments
to the violin, and began complaining of her hard fate; and how this
pianiste said that she, too, was feeling how heavy her position was and
would like to change it; and how clara suddenly came up to them; and how
they all three decided to change their life. they thought that the night
was over, and were about to go away, when suddenly the noise of tipsy
voices was heard in the ante-room. the violinist played a tune and the
pianiste began hammering the first figure of a quadrille on the piano,
to the tune of a most merry russian song. a small, perspiring man,
smelling of spirits, with a white tie and swallow-tail coat, which he
took off after the first figure, came up to her, hiccoughing, and
caught her up, while another fat man, with a beard, and also wearing a
dress-coat (they had come straight from a ball) caught clara up, and for
a long time they turned, danced, screamed, drank. . . . and so it
went on for another year, and another, and a third. how could she help
changing? and he was the cause of it all. and, suddenly, all her former
bitterness against him reawoke; she wished to scold, to reproach him.
she regretted having neglected the opportunity of repeating to him once
more that she knew him, and would not give in to him--would not let him
make use of her spiritually as he had done physically.

and she longed for drink in order to stifle the feeling of pity to
herself and the useless feeling of reproach to him. and she would have
broken her word if she had been inside the prison. here she could not
get any spirits except by applying to the medical assistant, and she was
afraid of him because he made up to her, and intimate relations with
men were disgusting to her now. after sitting a while on a form in the
passage she returned to her little room, and without paying any heed to
her companion’s words, she wept for a long time over her wrecked life.



chapter xiv.

an aristocratic circle.

nekhludoff had four matters to attend to in petersburg. the first was
the appeal to the senate in maslova’s case; the second, to hand in
theodosia birukoff’s petition to the committee; the third, to comply
with vera doukhova’s requests--i.e., try to get her friend shoustova
released from prison, and get permission for a mother to visit her son
in prison. vera doukhova had written to him about this, and he was
going to the gendarmerie office to attend to these two matters, which he
counted as one.

the fourth matter he meant to attend to was the case of some sectarians
who had been separated from their families and exiled to the caucasus
because they read and discussed the gospels. it was not so much to
them as to himself he had promised to do all he could to clear up this
affair.

since his last visit to maslennikoff, and especially since he had been
in the country, nekhludoff had not exactly formed a resolution but felt
with his whole nature a loathing for that society in which he had lived
till then, that society which so carefully hides the sufferings of
millions in order to assure ease and pleasure to a small number of
people, that the people belonging to this society do not and cannot
see these sufferings, nor the cruelty and wickedness of their life.
nekhludoff could no longer move in this society without feeling ill at
ease and reproaching himself. and yet all the ties of relationship and
friendship, and his own habits, were drawing him back into this society.
besides, that which alone interested him now, his desire to help maslova
and the other sufferers, made it necessary to ask for help and service
from persons belonging to that society, persons whom he not only could
not respect, but who often aroused in him indignation and a feeling of
contempt.

when he came to petersburg and stopped at his aunt’s--his mother’s
sister, the countess tcharsky, wife of a former minister--nekhludoff at
once found himself in the very midst of that aristocratic circle which
had grown so foreign to him. this was very unpleasant, but there was no
possibility of getting out of it. to put up at an hotel instead of at
his aunt’s house would have been to offend his aunt, and, besides, his
aunt had important connections and might be extremely useful in all
these matters he meant to attend to.

“what is this i hear about you? all sorts of marvels,” said the countess
katerina ivanovna tcharsky, as she gave him his coffee immediately after
his arrival. “_vous posez pour un howard_. helping criminals, going the
round of prisons, setting things right.”

“oh, no. i never thought of it.”

“why not? it is a good thing, only there seems to be some romantic story
connected with it. let us hear all about it.”

nekhludoff told her the whole truth about his relations to maslova.

“yes, yes, i remember your poor mother telling me about it. that was
when you were staying with those old women. i believe they wished to
marry you to their ward (the countess katerina ivanovna had always
despised nekhludoff’s aunts on his father’s side). so it’s she. _elle
est encore jolie?_”

katerina ivanovna was a strong, bright, energetic, talkative woman of
60. she was tall and very stout, and had a decided black moustache
on her lip. nekhludoff was fond of her and had even as a child been
infected by her energy and mirth.

“no, ma tante, that’s at an end. i only wish to help her, because she is
innocently accused. i am the cause of it and the cause of her fate being
what it is. i feel it my duty to do all i can for her.”

“but what is this i have heard about your intention of marrying her?”

“yes, it was my intention, but she does not wish it.”

katerina ivanovna looked at her nephew with raised brows and drooping
eyeballs, in silent amazement. suddenly her face changed, and with a
look of pleasure she said: “well, she is wiser than you. dear me, you
are a fool. and you would have married her?”

“most certainly.”

“after her having been what she was?”

“all the more, since i was the cause of it.”

“well, you are a simpleton,” said his aunt, repressing a smile, “a
terrible simpleton; but it is just because you are such a terrible
simpleton that i love you.” she repeated the word, evidently liking it,
as it seemed to correctly convey to her mind the idea of her nephew’s
moral state. “do you know--what a lucky chance. aline has a wonderful
home--the magdalene home. i went there once. they are terribly
disgusting. after that i had to pray continually. but aline is devoted
to it, body and soul, so we shall place her there--yours, i mean.”

“but she is condemned to siberia. i have come on purpose to appeal about
it. this is one of my requests to you.”

“dear me, and where do you appeal to in this case?”

“to the senate.”

“ah, the senate! yes, my dear cousin leo is in the senate, but he is in
the heraldry department, and i don’t know any of the real ones. they are
all some kind of germans--gay, fay, day--tout l’alphabet, or else all
sorts of ivanoffs, simenoffs, nikitines, or else ivanenkos, simonenkos,
nikitenkos, pour varier. des gens de l’autre monde. well, it is all the
same. i’ll tell my husband, he knows them. he knows all sorts of people.
i’ll tell him, but you will have to explain, he never understands me.
whatever i may say, he always maintains he does not understand it. c’est
un parti pris, every one understands but only not he.”

at this moment a footman with stockinged legs came in with a note on a
silver platter.

“there now, from aline herself. you’ll have a chance of hearing
kiesewetter.”

“who is kiesewetter?”

“kiesewetter? come this evening, and you will find out who he is. he
speaks in such a way that the most hardened criminals sink on their
knees and weep and repent.”

the countess katerina ivanovna, however strange it may seem, and however
little it seemed in keeping with the rest of her character, was a
staunch adherent to that teaching which holds that the essence of
christianity lies in the belief in redemption. she went to meetings
where this teaching, then in fashion, was being preached, and assembled
the “faithful” in her own house. though this teaching repudiated all
ceremonies, icons, and sacraments, katerina ivanovna had icons in every
room, and one on the wall above her bed, and she kept all that the
church prescribed without noticing any contradiction in that.

“there now; if your magdalene could hear him she would be converted,”
 said the countess. “do stay at home to-night; you will hear him. he is a
wonderful man.”

“it does not interest me, ma tante.”

“but i tell you that it is interesting, and you must come home. now you
may go. what else do you want of me? _videz votre sac_.”

“the next is in the fortress.”

“in the fortress? i can give you a note for that to the baron
kriegsmuth. _cest un tres brave homme_. oh, but you know him; he was a
comrade of your father’s. _il donne dans le spiritisme_. but that does
not matter, he is a good fellow. what do you want there?”

“i want to get leave for a mother to visit her son who is imprisoned
there. but i was told that this did not depend on kriegsmuth but on
tcherviansky.”

“i do not like tcherviansky, but he is mariette’s husband; we might ask
her. she will do it for me. _elle est tres gentille_.”

“i have also to petition for a woman who is imprisoned there without
knowing what for.”

“no fear; she knows well enough. they all know it very well, and it
serves them right, those short-haired [many advanced women wear their
hair short, like men] ones.”

“we do not know whether it serves them right or not. but they suffer.
you are a christian and believe in the gospel teaching and yet you are
so pitiless.”

“that has nothing to do with it. the gospels are the gospels, but what
is disgusting remains disgusting. it would be worse if i pretended to
love nihilists, especially short-haired women nihilists, when i cannot
bear them.”

“why can you not bear them?”

“you ask why, after the 1st of march?” [the emperor alexander ii was
killed on the first of march, old style.]

“they did not all take part in it on the 1st of march.”

“never mind; they should not meddle with what is no business of theirs.
it’s not women’s business.”

“yet you consider that mariette may take part in business.”

“mariette? mariette is mariette, and these are goodness knows what. want
to teach everybody.”

“not to teach but simply to help the people.”

“one knows whom to help and whom not to help without them.”

“but the peasants are in great need. i have just returned from the
country. is it necessary, that the peasants should work to the very
limits of their strength and never have sufficient to eat while we are
living in the greatest luxury?” said nekhludoff, involuntarily led on by
his aunt’s good nature into telling her what he was in his thoughts.

“what do you want, then? that i should work and not eat anything?”

“no, i do not wish you not to eat. i only wish that we should all work
and all eat.” he could not help smiling as he said it.

again raising her brow and drooping her eyeballs his aunt looked at him
curiously. “_mon cher vous finirez mal_,” she said.

just then the general, and former minister, countess tcharsky’s husband,
a tall, broad-shouldered man, came into the room.

“ah, dmitri, how d’you do?” he said, turning his freshly-shaved cheek to
nekhludoff to be kissed. “when did you get here?” and he silently kissed
his wife on the forehead.

“_non il est impayable_,” the countess said, turning to her husband.
“he wants me to go and wash clothes and live on potatoes. he is an awful
fool, but all the same do what he is going to ask of you. a terrible
simpleton,” she added. “have you heard? kamenskaya is in such despair
that they fear for her life,” she said to her husband. “you should go
and call there.”

“yes; it is dreadful,” said her husband.

“go along, then, and talk to him. i must write some letters.”

hardly had nekhludoff stepped into the room next the drawing-room than
she called him back.

“shall i write to mariette, then?”

“please, ma tante.”

“i shall leave a blank for what you want to say about the short-haired
one, and she will give her husband his orders, and he’ll do it. do not
think me wicked; they are all so disgusting, your prologues, but _je
ne leur veux pas de mal_, bother them. well, go, but be sure to stay at
home this evening to hear kiesewetter, and we shall have some prayers.
and if only you do not resist _cela vous fera beaucoup de bien_. i
know your poor mother and all of you were always very backward in these
things.”



chapter xv.

an average statesman.

count ivan michaelovitch had been a minister, and was a man of strong
convictions. the convictions of count ivan michaelovitch consisted in
the belief that, just as it was natural for a bird to feed on worms,
to be clothed in feathers and down, and to fly in the air, so it
was natural for him to feed on the choicest and most expensive food,
prepared by highly-paid cooks, to wear the most comfortable and most
expensive clothing, to drive with the best and fastest horses, and that,
therefore, all these things should be ready found for him. besides this,
count ivan michaelovitch considered that the more money he could get out
of the treasury by all sorts of means, the more orders he had, including
different diamond insignia of something or other, and the oftener he
spoke to highly-placed individuals of both sexes, so much the better it
was.

all the rest count ivan michaelovitch considered insignificant and
uninteresting beside these dogmas. all the rest might be as it was, or
just the reverse. count ivan michaelovitch lived and acted according
to these lights for 40 years, and at the end of 40 years reached the
position of a minister of state. the chief qualities that enabled
count ivan michaelovitch to reach this position were his capacity of
understanding the meaning of documents and laws and of drawing up,
though clumsily, intelligible state papers, and of spelling them
correctly; secondly, his very stately appearance, which enabled him,
when necessary, to seem not only extremely proud, but unapproachable
and majestic, while at other times he could be abjectly and almost
passionately servile; thirdly, the absence of any general principles
or rules, either of personal or administrative morality, which made it
possible for him either to agree or disagree with anybody according to
what was wanted at the time. when acting thus his only endeavour was
to sustain the appearance of good breeding and not to seem too plainly
inconsistent. as for his actions being moral or not, in themselves, or
whether they were going to result in the highest welfare or greatest
evil for the whole of the russian empire, or even the entire world, that
was quite indifferent to him. when he became minister, not only
those dependent on him (and there were great many of them) and people
connected with him, but many strangers and even he himself were
convinced that he was a very clever statesman. but after some time had
elapsed and he had done nothing and had nothing to show, and when in
accordance with the law of the struggle for existence others, like
himself, who had learnt to write and understand documents, stately and
unprincipled officials, had displaced him, he turned out to be not
only far from clever but very limited and badly educated. though
self-assured, his views hardly reaching the level of those in the
leading articles of the conservative papers, it became apparent
that there was nothing in him to distinguish him from those other
badly-educated and self-assured officials who had pushed him out, and
he himself saw it. but this did not shake his conviction that he had to
receive a great deal of money out of the treasury every year, and new
decorations for his dress clothes. this conviction was so firm that no
one had the pluck to refuse these things to him, and he received yearly,
partly in form of a pension, partly as a salary for being a member in
a government institution and chairman of all sorts of committees
and councils, several tens of thousands of roubles, besides the
right--highly prized by him--of sewing all sorts of new cords to his
shoulders and trousers, and ribbons to wear under and enamel stars
to fix on to his dress coat. in consequence of this count ivan
michaelovitch had very high connections.

count ivan michaelovitch listened to nekhludoff as he was wont to listen
to the reports of the permanent secretary of his department, and, having
heard him, said he would give him two notes, one to the senator wolff,
of the appeal department. “all sorts of things are reported of him, but
dans tous les cas c’est un homme tres comme ii faut,” he said. “he is
indebted to me, and will do all that is possible.” the other note count
ivan michaelovitch gave nekhludoff was to an influential member of
the petition committee. the story of theodosia birukoff as told by
nekhludoff interested him very much. when nekhludoff said that he
thought of writing to the empress, the count replied that it certainly
was a very touching story, and might, if occasion presented itself, he
told her, but he could not promise. let the petition be handed in in due
form.

should there be an opportunity, and if a petit comite were called on
thursday, he thought he would tell her the story. as soon as nekhludoff
had received these two notes, and a note to mariette from his aunt, he
at once set off to these different places.

first he went to mariette’s. he had known her as a half-grown girl, the
daughter of an aristocratic but not wealthy family, and had heard how
she had married a man who was making a career, whom nekhludoff had heard
badly spoken of; and, as usual, he felt it hard to ask a favour of a man
he did not esteem. in these cases he always felt an inner dissension
and dissatisfaction, and wavered whether to ask the favour or not, and
always resolved to ask. besides feeling himself in a false position
among those to whose set he no longer regarded himself as belonging, who
yet regarded him as belonging to them, he felt himself getting into the
old accustomed rut, and in spite of himself fell into the thoughtless
and immoral tone that reigned in that circle. he felt that from the
first, with his aunt, he involuntarily fell into a bantering tone while
talking about serious matters.

petersburg in general affected him with its usual physically
invigorating and mentally dulling effect.

everything so clean, so comfortably well-arranged and the people so
lenient in moral matters, that life seemed very easy.

a fine, clean, and polite isvostchik drove him past fine, clean, polite
policemen, along the fine, clean, watered streets, past fine, clean
houses to the house in which mariette lived. at the front door stood
a pair of english horses, with english harness, and an english-looking
coachman on the box, with the lower part of his face shaved, proudly
holding a whip. the doorkeeper, dressed in a wonderfully clean livery,
opened the door into the hall, where in still cleaner livery with gold
cords stood the footman with his splendid whiskers well combed out,
and the orderly on duty in a brand-new uniform. “the general does not
receive, and the generaless does not receive either. she is just going
to drive out.”

nekhludoff took out katerina ivanovna’s letter, and going up to a table
on which lay a visitors’ book, began to write that he was sorry not to
have been able to see any one; when the footman went up the staircase
the doorkeeper went out and shouted to the coachman, and the orderly
stood up rigid with his arms at his sides following with his eyes a
little, slight lady, who was coming down the stairs with rapid steps not
in keeping with all the grandeur.

mariette had a large hat on, with feathers, a black dress and cape, and
new black gloves. her face was covered by a veil.

when she saw nekhludoff she lifted the veil off a very pretty face with
bright eyes that looked inquiringly at him.

“ah, prince dmitri ivanovitch nekhludoff,” she said, with a soft,
pleasant voice. “i should have known--”

“what! you even remember my name?”

“i should think so. why, i and my sisters have even been in love with
you,” she said, in french. “but, dear me, how you have altered. oh, what
a pity i have to go out. but let us go up again,” she said and stopped
hesitatingly. then she looked at the clock. “no, i can’t. i am going to
kamenskaya’s to attend a mass for the dead. she is terribly afflicted.”

“who is this kamenskaya?”

“have you not heard? her son was killed in a duel. he fought posen. he
was the only son. terrible i the mother is very much afflicted.”

“yes. i have heard of it.”

“no, i had better go, and you must come again, to-night or to-morrow,”
 she said, and went to the door with quick, light steps.

“i cannot come to-night,” he said, going out after her; “but i have
a request to make you,” and he looked at the pair of bays that were
drawing up to the front door.

“what is this?”

“this is a letter from aunt to you,” said nekhludoff, handing her
a narrow envelope, with a large crest. “you’ll find all about it in
there.”

“i know countess katerina ivanovna thinks i have some influence with my
husband in business matters. she is mistaken. i can do nothing and do
not like to interfere. but, of course, for you i am willing to be false
to my principle. what is this business about?” she said, searching in
vain for her pocket with her little black gloved hand.

“there is a girl imprisoned in the fortress, and she is ill and
innocent.”

“what is her name?”

“lydia shoustova. it’s in the note.”

“all right; i’ll see what i can do,” she said, and lightly jumped into
her little, softly upholstered, open carriage, its brightly-varnished
splash-guards glistening in the sunshine, and opened her parasol. the
footman got on the box and gave the coachman a sign. the carriage moved,
but at that moment she touched the coachman with her parasol and the
slim-legged beauties, the bay mares, stopped, bending their beautiful
necks and stepping from foot to foot.

“but you must come, only, please, without interested motives,” and she
looked at him with a smile, the force of which she well knew, and, as if
the performance over and she were drawing the curtain, she dropped
the veil over her face again. “all right,” and she again touched the
coachman.

nekhludoff raised his hat, and the well-bred bays, slightly snorting,
set off, their shoes clattering on the pavement, and the carriage rolled
quickly and smoothly on its new rubber tyres, giving a jump only now and
then over some unevenness of the road.



chapter xvi.

an up-to-date senator.

when nekhludoff remembered the smiles that had passed between him and
mariette, he shook his head.

“you have hardly time to turn round before you are again drawn into
this life,” he thought, feeling that discord and those doubts which the
necessity to curry favour from people he did not esteem caused.

after considering where to go first, so as not to have to retrace his
steps, nekhludoff set off for the senate. there he was shown into the
office where he found a great many very polite and very clean officials
in the midst of a magnificent apartment. maslova’s petition was received
and handed on to that wolf, to whom nekhludoff had a letter from his
uncle, to be examined and reported on.

“there will be a meeting of the senate this week,” the official said to
nekhludoff, “but maslova’s case will hardly come before that meeting.”

“it might come before the meeting on wednesday, by special request,” one
of the officials remarked.

during the time nekhludoff waited in the office, while some information
was being taken, he heard that the conversation in the senate was all
about the duel, and he heard a detailed account of how a young man,
kaminski, had been killed. it was here he first heard all the facts of
the case which was exciting the interest of all petersburg. the story
was this: some officers were eating oysters and, as usual, drinking very
much, when one of them said something ill-natured about the regiment to
which kaminski belonged, and kaminski called him a liar. the other hit
kaminski. the next day they fought. kaminski was wounded in the stomach
and died two hours later. the murderer and the seconds were arrested,
but it was said that though they were arrested and in the guardhouse
they would be set free in a fortnight.

from the senate nekhludoff drove to see an influential member of the
petition committee, baron vorobioff, who lived in a splendid house
belonging to the crown. the doorkeeper told nekhludoff in a severe tone
that the baron could not be seen except on his reception days; that he
was with his majesty the emperor to-day, and the next day he would again
have to deliver a report. nekhludoff left his uncle’s letter with the
doorkeeper and went on to see the senator wolf. wolf had just had his
lunch, and was as usual helping digestion by smoking a cigar and pacing
up and down the room, when nekhludoff came in. vladimir vasilievitch
wolf was certainly _un homme tres comme il faut_, and prized this
quality very highly, and from that elevation he looked down at everybody
else. he could not but esteem this quality of his very highly, because
it was thanks to it alone that he had made a brilliant career, the very
career he desired, i.e., by marriage he obtained a fortune which brought
him in 18,000 roubles a year, and by his own exertions the post of a
senator. he considered himself not only _un homme tres comme il faut_,
but also a man of knightly honour. by honour he understood not accepting
secret bribes from private persons. but he did not consider it dishonest
to beg money for payment of fares and all sorts of travelling expenses
from the crown, and to do anything the government might require of him
in return. to ruin hundreds of innocent people, to cause them to be
imprisoned, to be exiled because of their love for their people and the
religion of their fathers, as he had done in one of the governments of
poland when he was governor there. he did not consider it dishonourable,
but even thought it a noble, manly and patriotic action. nor did he
consider it dishonest to rob his wife and sister-in-law, as he had
done, but thought it a wise way of arranging his family life. his family
consisted of his commonplace wife, his sister-in-law, whose fortune
he had appropriated by selling her estate and putting the money to his
account, and his meek, frightened, plain daughter, who lived a lonely,
weary life, from which she had lately begun to look for relaxation in
evangelicism, attending meetings at aline’s, and the countess katerina
ivanovna. wolf’s son, who had grown a beard at the age of 15, and had at
that age begun to drink and lead a depraved life, which he continued to
do till the age of 20, when he was turned out by his father because
he never finished his studies, moved in a low set and made debts which
committed the father. the father had once paid a debt of 250 roubles for
his son, then another of 600 roubles, but warned the son that he did it
for the last time, and that if the son did not reform he would be turned
out of the house and all further intercourse between him and his family
would he put a stop to. the son did not reform, but made a debt of a
thousand roubles, and took the liberty of telling his father that life
at home was a torment anyhow. then wolf declared to his son that he
might go where he pleased--that he was no son of his any longer. since
then wolf pretended he had no son, and no one at home dared speak to him
about his son, and vladimir vasilievitch wolf was firmly convinced that
he had arranged his family life in the best way. wolf stopped pacing
up and down his study, and greeted nekhludoff with a friendly though
slightly ironical smile. this was his way of showing how comme il faut
he was, and how superior to the majority of men. he read the note which
nekhludoff handed to him.

“please take a seat, and excuse me if i continue to walk up and down,
with your permission,” he said, putting his hands into his coat pockets,
and began again to walk with light, soft steps across his large, quietly
and stylishly furnished study. “very pleased to make your acquaintance
and of course very glad to do anything that count ivan michaelovitch
wishes,” he said, blowing the fragrant blue smoke out of his mouth and
removing his cigar carefully so as not to drop the ash.

“i should only like to ask that the case might come on soon, so that
if the prisoner has to go to siberia she might set off early,” said
nekhludoff.

“yes, yes, with one of the first steamers from nijni. i know,” said
wolf, with his patronising smile, always knowing in advance whatever one
wanted to tell him.

“what is the prisoner’s name?”

“maslova.”

wolf went up to the table and looked at a paper that lay on a piece of
cardboard among other business papers.

“yes, yes. maslova. all right, i will ask the others. we shall hear the
case on wednesday.”

“then may i telegraph to the advocate?”

“the advocate! what’s that for? but if you like, why not?”

“the causes for appeal may be insufficient,” said nekhludoff, “but
i think the case will show that the sentence was passed owing to a
misunderstanding.”

“yes, yes; it may be so, but the senate cannot decide the case on its
merits,” said wolf, looking seriously at the ash of his cigar. “the
senate only considers the exactness of the application of the laws and
their right interpretation.”

“but this seems to me to be an exceptional case.”

“i know, i know! all cases are exceptional. we shall do our duty. that’s
all.” the ash was still holding on, but had began breaking, and was in
danger of falling.

“do you often come to petersburg?” said wolf, holding his cigar so that
the ash should not fall. but the ash began to shake, and wolf carefully
carried it to the ashpan, into which it fell.

“what a terrible thing this is with regard to kaminski,” he said. “a
splendid young man. the only son. especially the mother’s position,” he
went on, repeating almost word for word what every one in petersburg
was at that time saying about kaminski. wolf spoke a little about the
countess katerina ivanovna and her enthusiasm for the new religious
teaching, which he neither approved nor disapproved of, but which was
evidently needless to him who was so comme il faut, and then rang the
bell.

nekhludoff bowed.

“if it is convenient, come and dine on wednesday, and i will give you a
decisive answer,” said wolf, extending his hand.

it was late, and nekhludoff returned to his aunt’s.



chapter xvii.

countess katerina ivanovna’s dinner party.

countess katerina ivanovna’s dinner hour was half-past seven, and the
dinner was served in a new manner that nekhludoff had not yet seen
anywhere. after they had placed the dishes on the table the waiters left
the room and the diners helped themselves. the men would not let the
ladies take the trouble of moving, and, as befitted the stronger sex,
they manfully took on themselves the burden of putting the food on
the ladies’ plates and of filling their glasses. when one course was
finished, the countess pressed the button of an electric bell fitted
to the table and the waiters stepped in noiselessly and quickly carried
away the dishes, changed the plates, and brought in the next course.
the dinner was very refined, the wines very costly. a french chef was
working in the large, light kitchens, with two white-clad assistants.
there were six persons at dinner, the count and countess, their son
(a surly officer in the guards who sat with his elbows on the table),
nekhludoff, a french lady reader, and the count’s chief steward, who
had come up from the country. here, too, the conversation was about the
duel, and opinions were given as to how the emperor regarded the case.
it was known that the emperor was very much grieved for the mother’s
sake, and all were grieved for her, and as it was also known that the
emperor did not mean to be very severe to the murderer, who defended
the honour of his uniform, all were also lenient to the officer who had
defended the honour of his uniform. only the countess katerina ivanovna,
with her free thoughtlessness, expressed her disapproval.

“they get drunk, and kill unobjectionable young men. i should not
forgive them on any account,” she said.

“now, that’s a thing i cannot understand,” said the count.

“i know that you never can understand what i say,” the countess began,
and turning to nekhludoff, she added:

“everybody understands except my husband. i say i am sorry for the
mother, and i do not wish him to be contented, having killed a man.”
 then her son, who had been silent up to then, took the murderer’s part,
and rudely attacked his mother, arguing that an officer could not behave
in any other way, because his fellow-officers would condemn him and turn
him out of the regiment. nekhludoff listened to the conversation without
joining in. having been an officer himself, he understood, though he
did not agree with, young tcharsky’s arguments, and at the same time
he could not help contrasting the fate of the officer with that of a
beautiful young convict whom he had seen in the prison, and who was
condemned to the mines for having killed another in a fight. both had
turned murderers through drunkenness. the peasant had killed a man in
a moment of irritation, and he was parted from his wife and family, had
chains on his legs, and his head shaved, and was going to hard labour in
siberia, while the officer was sitting in a fine room in the guardhouse,
eating a good dinner, drinking good wine, and reading books, and would
be set free in a day or two to live as he had done before, having only
become more interesting by the affair. nekhludoff said what he had been
thinking, and at first his aunt, katerina ivanovna, seemed to agree with
him, but at last she became silent as the rest had done, and nekhludoff
felt that he had committed something akin to an impropriety. in the
evening, soon after dinner, the large hall, with high-backed carved
chairs arranged in rows as for a meeting, and an armchair next to a
little table, with a bottle of water for the speaker, began to fill
with people come to hear the foreigner, kiesewetter, preach. elegant
equipages stopped at the front entrance. in the hall sat richly-dressed
ladies in silks and velvets and lace, with false hair and false busts
and drawn-in waists, and among them men in uniform and evening dress,
and about five persons of the common class, i.e., two men-servants, a
shop-keeper, a footman, and a coachman. kiesewetter, a thick-set, grisly
man, spoke english, and a thin young girl, with a pince-nez, translated
it into russian promptly and well. he was saying that our sins were so
great, the punishment for them so great and so unavoidable, that it was
impossible to live anticipating such punishment. “beloved brothers and
sisters, let us for a moment consider what we are doing, how we are
living, how we have offended against the all-loving lord, and how
we make christ suffer, and we cannot but understand that there is no
forgiveness possible for us, no escape possible, that we are all doomed
to perish. a terrible fate awaits us---everlasting torment,” he said,
with tears in his trembling voice. “oh, how can we be saved, brothers?
how can we be saved from this terrible, unquenchable fire? the house is
in flames; there is no escape.”

he was silent for a while, and real tears flowed down his cheeks. it
was for about eight years that each time when he got to this part of his
speech, which he himself liked so well, he felt a choking in his throat
and an irritation in his nose, and the tears came in his eyes, and these
tears touched him still more. sobs were heard in the room. the countess
katerina ivanovna sat with her elbows on an inlaid table, leaning her
head on her hands, and her shoulders were shaking. the coachman looked
with fear and surprise at the foreigner, feeling as if he was about to
run him down with the pole of his carriage and the foreigner would
not move out of his way. all sat in positions similar to that katerina
ivanovna had assumed. wolf’s daughter, a thin, fashionably-dressed girl,
very like her father, knelt with her face in her hands.

the orator suddenly uncovered his face, and smiled a very real-looking
smile, such as actors express joy with, and began again with a sweet,
gentle voice:

“yet there is a way to be saved. here it is--a joyful, easy way. the
salvation is the blood shed for us by the only son of god, who gave
himself up to torments for our sake. his sufferings, his blood, will
save us. brothers and sisters,” he said, again with tears in his voice,
“let us praise the lord, who has given his only begotten son for the
redemption of mankind. his holy blood . . .”

nekhludoff felt so deeply disgusted that he rose silently, and frowning
and keeping back a groan of shame, he left on tiptoe, and went to his
room.



chapter xviii.

officialdom.

hardly had nekhludoff finished dressing the next morning, just as he
was about to go down, the footman brought him a card from the moscow
advocate. the advocate had come to st. petersburg on business of his
own, and was going to be present when maslova’s case was examined in the
senate, if that would be soon. the telegram sent by nekhludoff crossed
him on the way. having found out from nekhludoff when the case was going
to be heard, and which senators were to be present, he smiled. “exactly,
all the three types of senators,” he said. “wolf is a petersburg
official; skovorodnikoff is a theoretical, and bay a practical lawyer,
and therefore the most alive of them all,” said the advocate. “there is
most hope of him. well, and how about the petition committee?”

“oh, i’m going to baron vorobioff to-day. i could not get an audience
with him yesterday.”

“do you know why he is _baron_ vorobioff?” said the advocate, noticing
the slightly ironical stress that nekhludoff put on this foreign title,
followed by so very russian a surname.

“that was because the emperor paul rewarded the grandfather--i think he
was one of the court footmen--by giving him this title. he managed to
please him in some way, so he made him a baron. ‘it’s my wish, so don’t
gainsay me!’ and so there’s a _baron_ vorobioff, and very proud of the
title. he is a dreadful old humbug.”

“well, i’m going to see him,” said nekhludoff.

“that’s good; we can go together. i shall give you a lift.”

as they were going to start, a footman met nekhludoff in the ante-room,
and handed him a note from mariette:

_pour vous faire plaisir, f’ai agi tout a fait contre mes principes et
j’ai intercede aupres de mon mari pour votre protegee. il se trouve
que cette personne pout etre relaxee immediatement. mon mari a ecrit au
commandant. venez donc disinterestedly. je vous attends._

                          _m._

“just fancy!” said nekhludoff to the advocate. “is this not dreadful?
a woman whom they are keeping in solitary confinement for seven months
turns out to be quite innocent, and only a word was needed to get her
released.”

“that’s always so. well, anyhow, you have succeeded in getting what you
wanted.”

“yes, but this success grieves me. just think what must be going on
there. why have they been keeping her?”

“oh, it’s best not to look too deeply into it. well, then, i shall give
you a lift, if i may,” said the advocate, as they left the house, and
a fine carriage that the advocate had hired drove up to the door. “it’s
baron vorobioff you are going to see?”

the advocate gave the driver his directions, and the two good horses
quickly brought nekhludoff to the house in which the baron lived. the
baron was at home. a young official in uniform, with a long, thin neck,
a much protruding adam’s apple, and an extremely light walk, and two
ladies were in the first room.

“your name, please?” the young man with the adam’s apple asked, stepping
with extreme lightness and grace across from the ladies to nekhludoff.

nekhludoff gave his name.

“the baron was just mentioning you,” said the young man, the baron’s
adjutant, and went out through an inner door. he returned, leading a
weeping lady dressed in mourning. with her bony fingers the lady was
trying to pull her tangled veil over her face in order to hide her
tears.

“come in, please,” said the young man to nekhludoff, lightly stepping up
to the door of the study and holding it open. when nekhludoff came in,
he saw before him a thick-set man of medium height, with short hair,
in a frock coat, who was sitting in an armchair opposite a large
writing-table, and looking gaily in front of himself. the kindly, rosy
red face, striking by its contrast with the white hair, moustaches, and
beard, turned towards nekhludoff with a friendly smile.

“very glad to see you. your mother and i were old acquaintances and
friends. i have seen you as a boy, and later on as an officer. sit
down and tell me what i can do for you. yes, yes,” he said, shaking his
cropped white head, while nekhludoff was telling him theodosia’s story.
“go on, go on. i quite understand. it is certainly very touching. and
have you handed in the petition?”

“i have got the petition ready,” nekhludoff said, getting it out of his
pocket; “but i thought of speaking to you first in hopes that the case
would then get special attention paid to it.”

“you have done very well. i shall certainly report it myself,” said the
baron, unsuccessfully trying to put an expression of pity on his merry
face. “very touching! it is clear she was but a child; the husband
treated her roughly, this repelled her, but as time went on they fell in
love with each other. yes i will report the case.”

“count ivan michaelovitch was also going to speak about it.”

nekhludoff had hardly got these words out when the baron’s face changed.

“you had better hand in the petition into the office, after all, and i
shall do what i can,” he said.

at this moment the young official again entered the room, evidently
showing off his elegant manner of walking.

“that lady is asking if she may say a few words more.”

“well, ask her in. ah, mon cher, how many tears we have to see shed! if
only we could dry them all. one does all that lies within one’s power.”

the lady entered.

“i forgot to ask you that he should not be allowed to give up the
daughter, because he is ready . . .”

“but i have already told you that i should do all i can.”

“baron, for the love of god! you will save the mother?”

she seized his hand, and began kissing it.

“everything shall be done.”

when the lady went out nekhludoff also began to take leave.

“we shall do what we can. i shall speak about it at the ministry of
justice, and when we get their answer we shall do what we can.”

nekhludoff left the study, and went into the office again. just as in
the senate office, he saw, in a splendid apartment, a number of very
elegant officials, clean, polite, severely correct and distinguished in
dress and in speech.

“how many there are of them; how very many and how well fed they all
look! and what clean shirts and hands they all have, and how well all
their boots are polished! who does it for them? how comfortable they
all are, as compared not only with the prisoners, but even with the
peasants!” these thoughts again involuntarily came to nekhludoff’s mind.



chapter xix.

an old general of repute.

the man on whom depended the easing of the fate of the petersburg
prisoners was an old general of repute--a baron of german descent,
who, as it was said of him, had outlived his wits. he had received a
profusion of orders, but only wore one of them, the order of the white
cross. he had received this order, which he greatly valued, while
serving in the caucasus, because a number of russian peasants, with
their hair cropped, and dressed in uniform and armed with guns and
bayonets, had killed at his command more than a thousand men who were
defending their liberty, their homes, and their families. later on
he served in poland, and there also made russian peasants commit many
different crimes, and got more orders and decorations for his uniform.
then he served somewhere else, and now that he was a weak, old man
he had this position, which insured him a good house, an income and
respect. he strictly observed all the regulations which were prescribed
“from above,” and was very zealous in the fulfilment of these
regulations, to which he ascribed a special importance, considering that
everything else in the world might be changed except the regulations
prescribed “from above.” his duty was to keep political prisoners,
men and women, in solitary confinement in such a way that half of them
perished in 10 years’ time, some going out of their minds, some dying
of consumption, some committing suicide by starving themselves to death,
cutting their veins with bits of glass, hanging, or burning themselves
to death.

the old general was not ignorant of this; it all happened within his
knowledge; but these cases no more touched his conscience than accidents
brought on by thunderstorms, floods, etc. these cases occurred as a
consequence of the fulfilment of regulations prescribed “from above” by
his imperial majesty. these regulations had to be carried out
without fail, and therefore it was absolutely useless to think of the
consequences of their fulfilment. the old general did not even allow
himself to think of such things, counting it his patriotic duty as a
soldier not to think of them for fear of getting weak in the carrying
out of these, according to his opinion, very important obligations. once
a week the old general made the round of the cells, one of the duties of
his position, and asked the prisoners if they had any requests to make.
the prisoners had all sorts of requests. he listened to them quietly, in
impenetrable silence, and never fulfilled any of their requests, because
they were all in disaccord with the regulations. just as nekhludoff
drove up to the old general’s house, the high notes of the bells on the
belfry clock chimed “great is the lord,” and then struck two. the sound
of these chimes brought back to nekhludoff’s mind what he had read
in the notes of the decembrists [the decembrists were a group who
attempted, but failed, to put an end to absolutism in russia at the time
of the accession of nicholas the first] about the way this sweet music
repeated every hour re-echoes in the hearts of those imprisoned for
life.

meanwhile the old general was sitting in his darkened drawing-room at
an inlaid table, turning a saucer on a piece of paper with the aid of
a young artist, the brother of one of his subordinates. the thin,
weak, moist fingers of the artist were pressed against the wrinkled and
stiff-jointed fingers of the old general, and the hands joined in this
manner were moving together with the saucer over a paper that had all
the letters of the alphabet written on it. the saucer was answering the
questions put by the general as to how souls will recognise each other
after death.

when nekhludoff sent in his card by an orderly acting as footman, the
soul of joan of arc was speaking by the aid of the saucer. the soul of
joan of arc had already spelt letter by letter the words: “they well
knew each other,” and these words had been written down. when the
orderly came in the saucer had stopped first on b, then on y, and began
jerking hither and thither. this jerking was caused by the general’s
opinion that the next letter should be b, i.e., joan of arc ought to
say that the souls will know each other by being cleansed of all that
is earthly, or something of the kind, clashing with the opinion of the
artist, who thought the next letter should be l, i.e., that the souls
should know each other by light emanating from their astral bodies. the
general, with his bushy grey eyebrows gravely contracted, sat gazing at
the hands on the saucer, and, imagining that it was moving of its own
accord, kept pulling the saucer towards b. the pale-faced young artist,
with his thin hair combed back behind his cars, was looking with his
lifeless blue eyes into a dark corner of the drawing-room, nervously
moving his lips and pulling the saucer towards l.

the general made a wry face at the interruption, but after a moment’s
pause he took the card, put on his pince-nez, and, uttering a groan,
rose, in spite of the pain in his back, to his full height, rubbing his
numb fingers.

“ask him into the study.”

“with your excellency’s permission i will finish it alone,” said the
artist, rising. “i feel the presence.”

“all right, finish alone,” the general said, severely and decidedly, and
stepped quickly, with big, firm and measured strides, into his study.

“very pleased to see you,” said the general to nekhludoff, uttering the
friendly words in a gruff tone, and pointing to an armchair by the side
of the writing-table. “have you been in petersburg long?”

nekhludoff replied that he had only lately arrived.

“is the princess, your mother, well?”

“my mother is dead.”

“forgive me; i am very sorry. my son told me he had met you.”

the general’s son was making the same kind of career for himself that
the father had done, and, having passed the military academy, was now
serving in the inquiry office, and was very proud of his duties there.
his occupation was the management of government spies.

“why, i served with your father. we were friends--comrades. and you; are
you also in the service?”

“no, i am not.”

the general bent his head disapprovingly.

“i have a request to make, general.”

“very pleased. in what way can i be of service to you?”

“if my request is out of place pray pardon me. but i am obliged to make
it.”

“what is it?”

“there is a certain gourkevitch imprisoned in the fortress; his mother
asks for an interview with him, or at least to be allowed to send him
some books.”

the general expressed neither satisfaction nor dissatisfaction at
nekhludoff’s request, but bending his head on one side he closed his
eyes as if considering. in reality he was not considering anything, and
was not even interested in nekhludoff’s questions, well knowing that he
would answer them according to the law. he was simply resting mentally
and not thinking at all.

“you see,” he said at last, “this does not depend on me. there is a
regulation, confirmed by his majesty, concerning interviews; and as to
books, we have a library, and they may have what is permitted.”

“yes, but he wants scientific books; he wishes to study.”

“don’t you believe it,” growled the general. “it’s not study he wants;
it is just only restlessness.”

“but what is to be done? they must occupy their time somehow in their
hard condition,” said nekhludoff.

“they are always complaining,” said the general. “we know them.”

he spoke of them in a general way, as if they were all a specially bad
race of men. “they have conveniences here which can be found in few
places of confinement,” said the general, and he began to enumerate the
comforts the prisoners enjoyed, as if the aim of the institution was to
give the people imprisoned there a comfortable home.

“it is true it used to be rather rough, but now they are very well kept
here,” he continued. “they have three courses for dinner--and one of
them meat--cutlets, or rissoles; and on sundays they get a fourth--a
sweet dish. god grant every russian may eat as well as they do.”

like all old people, the general, having once got on to a familiar
topic, enumerated the various proofs he had often given before of the
prisoners being exacting and ungrateful.

“they get books on spiritual subjects and old journals. we have a
library. only they rarely read. at first they seem interested, later on
the new books remain uncut, and the old ones with their leaves unturned.
we tried them,” said the old general, with the dim likeness of a smile.
“we put bits of paper in on purpose, which remained just as they had
been placed. writing is also not forbidden,” he continued. “a slate is
provided, and a slate pencil, so that they can write as a pastime. they
can wipe the slate and write again. but they don’t write, either. oh,
they very soon get quite tranquil. at first they seem restless, but
later on they even grow fat and become very quiet.” thus spoke the
general, never suspecting the terrible meaning of his words.

nekhludoff listened to the hoarse old voice, looked at the stiff limbs,
the swollen eyelids under the grey brows, at the old, clean-shaved,
flabby jaw, supported by the collar of the military uniform, at the
white cross that this man was so proud of, chiefly because he had gained
it by exceptionally cruel and extensive slaughter, and knew that it was
useless to reply to the old man or to explain the meaning of his own
words to him.

he made another effort, and asked about the prisoner shoustova, for
whose release, as he had been informed that morning, orders were given.

“shoustova--shoustova? i cannot remember all their names, there are so
many of them,” he said, as if reproaching them because there were so
many. he rang, and ordered the secretary to be called. while waiting for
the latter, he began persuading nekhludoff to serve, saying that “honest
noblemen,” counting himself among the number, “were particularly needed
by the tsar and--the country,” he added, evidently only to round off
his sentence. “i am old, yet i am serving still, as well as my strength
allows.”

the secretary, a dry, emaciated man, with restless, intelligent eyes,
came in and reported that shoustova was imprisoned in some queer,
fortified place, and that he had received no orders concerning her.

“when we get the order we shall let her out the same day. we do not keep
them; we do not value their visits much,” said the general, with another
attempt at a playful smile, which only distorted his old face.

nekhludoff rose, trying to keep from expressing the mixed feelings of
repugnance and pity which he felt towards this terrible old man. the
old man on his part considered that he should not be too severe on the
thoughtless and evidently misguided son of his old comrade, and should
not leave him without advice.

“good-bye, my dear fellow; do not take it amiss. it is my affection that
makes me say it. do not keep company with such people as we have at our
place here. there are no innocent ones among them. all these people
are most immoral. we know them,” he said, in a tone that admitted no
possibility of doubt. and he did not doubt, not because the thing was
so, but because if it was not so, he would have to admit himself to
be not a noble hero living out the last days of a good life, but a
scoundrel, who sold, and still continued in his old age to sell, his
conscience.

“best of all, go and serve,” he continued; “the tsar needs honest
men--and the country,” he added. “well, supposing i and the others
refused to serve, as you are doing? who would be left? here we are,
finding fault with the order of things, and yet not wishing to help the
government.”

with a deep sigh nekhludoff made a low bow, shook the large, bony hand
condescendingly stretched out to him and left the room.

the general shook his head reprovingly, and rubbing his back, he again
went into the drawing-room where the artist was waiting for him. he had
already written down the answer given by the soul of joan of arc. the
general put on his pince-nez and read, “will know one another by light
emanating from their astral bodies.”

“ah,” said the general, with approval, and closed his eyes. “but how is
one to know if the light of all is alike?” he asked, and again crossed
fingers with the artist on the saucer.

the isvostchik drove nekhludoff out of the gate.

it is dull here, sir, he said, turning to nekhludoff. “i almost wished
to drive off without waiting for you.”

nekhludoff agreed. “yes, it is dull,” and he took a deep breath, and
looked up with a sense of relief at the grey clouds that were floating
in the sky, and at the glistening ripples made by the boats and steamers
on the neva.



chapter xx.

maslova’s appeal.

the next day maslova’s case was to be examined at the senate, and
nekhludoff and the advocate met at the majestic portal of the building,
where several carriages were waiting. ascending the magnificent and
imposing staircase to the first floor, the advocate, who knew all the
ins and outs of the place, turned to the left and entered through a door
which had the date of the introduction of the code of laws above it.

after taking off his overcoat in the first narrow room, he found out
from the attendant that the senators had all arrived, and that the last
had just come in. fanarin, in his swallow-tail coat, a white tie above
the white shirt-front, and a self-confident smile on his lips, passed
into the next room. in this room there were to the right a large
cupboard and a table, and to the left a winding staircase, which an
elegant official in uniform was descending with a portfolio under his
arm. in this room an old man with long, white hair and a patriarchal
appearance attracted every one’s attention. he wore a short coat and
grey trousers. two attendants stood respectfully beside him. the old man
with white hair entered the cupboard and shut himself in.

fanarin noticed a fellow-advocate dressed in the same way as himself,
with a white tie and dress coat, and at once entered into an animated
conversation with him.

nekhludoff was meanwhile examining the people in the room. the public
consisted of about 15 persons, of whom two were ladies--a young one with
a pince-nez, and an old, grey-haired one.

a case of libel was to be heard that day, and therefore the public were
more numerous than usual--chiefly persons belonging to the journalistic
world.

the usher, a red-cheeked, handsome man in a fine uniform, came up to
fanarin and asked him what his business was. when he heard that it was
the case of maslova, he noted something down and walked away. then the
cupboard door opened and the old man with the patriarchal appearance
stepped out, no longer in a short coat but in a gold-trimmed attire,
which made him look like a bird, and with metal plates on his
breast. this funny costume seemed to make the old man himself feel
uncomfortable, and, walking faster than his wont, he hurried out of the
door opposite the entrance.

“that is bay, a most estimable man,” fanarin said to nekhludoff, and
then having introduced him to his colleague, he explained the case that
was about to be heard, which he considered very interesting.

the hearing of the case soon commenced, and nekhludoff, with the
public, entered the left side of the senate chamber. they all, including
fanarin, took their places behind a grating. only the petersburg
advocate went up to a desk in front of the grating.

the senate chamber was not so big as the criminal court; and was more
simply furnished, only the table in front of the senators was covered
with crimson, gold-trimmed velvet, instead of green cloth; but the
attributes of all places of judgment, i.e., the mirror of justice, the
icon, the emblem of hypocrisy, and the emperor’s portrait, the emblem of
servility, were there.

the usher announced, in the same solemn manner: “the court is coming.”
 every one rose in the same way, and the senators entered in their
uniforms and sat down on highbacked chairs and leant on the table,
trying to appear natural, just in the same way as the judges in the
court of law. there were four senators present--nikitin, who took the
chair, a clean-shaved man with a narrow face and steely eyes; wolf, with
significantly compressed lips, and little white hands, with which he
kept turning over the pages of the business papers; skovorodnikoff,
a heavy, fat, pockmarked man--the learned lawyer; and bay, the
patriarchal-looking man who had arrived last.

with the advocates entered the chief secretary and public prosecutor, a
lean, clean-shaven young man of medium height, a very dark complexion,
and sad, black eyes. nekhludoff knew him at once, in spite of his
curious uniform and the fact that he had not seen him for six years. he
had been one of his best friends in nekhludoff’s student days.

“the public prosecutor selenin?” nekhludoff asked, turning to the
advocate.

“yes. why?”

“i know him well. he is a fine fellow.”

“and a good public prosecutor; business-like. now he is the man you
should have interested.”

“he will act according to his conscience in any case,” said nekhludoff,
recalling the intimate relations and friendship between himself and
selenin, and the attractive qualities of the latter--purity, honesty,
and good breeding in its best sense.

“yes, there is no time now,” whispered fanarin, who was listening to the
report of the case that had commenced.

the court of justice was accused of having left a decision of the court
of law unaltered.

nekhludoff listened and tried to make out the meaning of what was going
on; but, just as in the criminal court, his chief difficulty was
that not the evidently chief point, but some side issues, were being
discussed. the case was that of a newspaper which had published the
account of a swindle arranged by a director of a limited liability
company. it seemed that the only important question was whether the
director of the company really abused his trust, and how to stop him
from doing it. but the questions under consideration were whether the
editor had a right to publish this article of his contributor, and what
he had been guilty of in publishing it: slander or libel, and in what
way slander included libel, or libel included slander, and something
rather incomprehensible to ordinary people about all sorts of statutes
and resolutions passed by some general department.

the only thing clear to nekhludoff was that, in spite of what wolf had
so strenuously insisted on, the day before, i.e., that the senate could
not try a case on its merits, in this case he was evidently strongly
in favour of repealing the decision of the court of justice, and that
selenin, in spite of his characteristic reticence, stated the opposite
opinion with quite unexpected warmth. the warmth, which surprised
nekhludoff, evinced by the usually self-controlled selenin, was due to
his knowledge of the director’s shabbiness in money matters, and the
fact, which had accidentally come to his cars, that wolf had been to a
swell dinner party at the swindler’s house only a few days before.

now that wolf spoke on the case, guardedly enough, but with evident
bias, selenin became excited, and expressed his opinion with too much
nervous irritation for an ordinary business transaction.

it was clear that selenin’s speech had offended wolf. he grew red, moved
in his chair, made silent gestures of surprise, and at last rose, with
a very dignified and injured look, together with the other senators, and
went out into the debating-room.

“what particular case have you come about?” the usher asked again,
addressing fanarin.

“i have already told you: maslova’s case.”

“yes, quite so. it is to be heard to-day, but--”

“but what?” the advocate asked.

“well, you see, this case was to be examined without taking sides,
so that the senators will hardly come out again after passing the
resolution. but i will inform them.”

“what do you mean?”

“i’ll inform them; i’ll inform them.” and the usher again put something
down on his paper.

the senators really meant to pronounce their decision concerning the
libel case, and then to finish the other business, maslova’s case among
it, over their tea and cigarettes, without leaving the debating-room.



chapter xxi.

the appeal dismissed.

as soon as the senators were seated round the table in the
debating-room, wolf began to bring forward with great animation all the
motives in favour of a repeal. the chairman, an ill-natured man at
best, was in a particularly bad humour that day. his thoughts were
concentrated on the words he had written down in his memoranda on the
occasion when not he but viglanoff was appointed to the important post
he had long coveted. it was the chairman, nikitin’s, honest conviction
that his opinions of the officials of the two upper classes with which
he was in connection would furnish valuable material for the historians.
he had written a chapter the day before in which the officials of the
upper classes got it hot for preventing him, as he expressed it, from
averting the ruin towards which the present rulers of russia were
driving it, which simply meant that they had prevented his getting a
better salary. and now he was considering what a new light to posterity
this chapter would shed on events.

“yes, certainly,” he said, in reply to the words addressed to him by
wolf, without listening to them.

bay was listening to wolf with a sad face and drawing a garland on the
paper that lay before him. bay was a liberal of the very first water. he
held sacred the liberal traditions of the sixth decade of this century,
and if he ever overstepped the limits of strict neutrality it was always
in the direction of liberalism. so in this case; beside the fact that
the swindling director, who was prosecuting for libel, was a bad lot,
the prosecution of a journalist for libel in itself tending, as it did,
to restrict the freedom of the press, inclined bay to reject the appeal.

when wolf concluded his arguments bay stopped drawing his garland and
began in a sad and gentle voice (he was sad because he was obliged to
demonstrate such truisms) concisely, simply and convincingly to show
how unfounded the accusation was, and then, bending his white head, he
continued drawing his garland.

skovorodnikoff, who sat opposite wolf, and, with his fat fingers, kept
shoving his beard and moustaches into his mouth, stopped chewing his
beard as soon as bay was silent, and said with a loud, grating voice,
that, notwithstanding the fact of the director being a terrible
scoundrel, he would have been for the repeal of the sentence if there
were any legal reasons for it; but, as there were none, he was of bay’s
opinion. he was glad to put this spoke in wolf’s wheel.

the chairman agreed with skovorodnikoff, and the appeal was rejected.

wolf was dissatisfied, especially because it was like being caught
acting with dishonest partiality; so he pretended to be indifferent,
and, unfolding the document which contained maslova’s case, he became
engrossed in it. meanwhile the senators rang and ordered tea, and began
talking about the event that, together with the duel, was occupying the
petersburgers.

it was the case of the chief of a government department, who was accused
of the crime provided for in statute 995.

“what nastiness,” said bay, with disgust.

“why; where is the harm of it? i can show you a russian book containing
the project of a german writer, who openly proposes that it should not
be considered a crime,” said skovorodnikoff, drawing in greedily the
fumes of the crumpled cigarette, which he held between his fingers close
to the palm, and he laughed boisterously.

“impossible!” said bay.

“i shall show it you,” said skovorodnikoff, giving the full title of the
book, and even its date and the name of its editor.

“i hear he has been appointed governor to some town in siberia.”

“that’s fine. the archdeacon will meet him with a crucifix. they ought
to appoint an archdeacon of the same sort,” said skovorodnikoff. “i
could recommend them one,” and he threw the end of his cigarette into
his saucer, and again shoved as much of his beard and moustaches as he
could into his mouth and began chewing them.

the usher came in and reported the advocate’s and nekhludoff’s desire to
be present at the examination of maslova’s case.

“this case,” wolf said, “is quite romantic,” and he told them what he
knew about nekhludoff’s relations with maslova. when they had spoken
a little about it and finished their tea and cigarettes, the senators
returned into the senate chamber and proclaimed their decision in the
libel case, and began to hear maslova’s case.

wolf, in his thin voice, reported maslova’s appeal very fully, but
again not without some bias and an evident wish for the repeal of the
sentence.

“have you anything to add?” the chairman said, turning to fanarin.
fanarin rose, and standing with his broad white chest expanded, proved
point by point, with wonderful exactness and persuasiveness, how the
court had in six points strayed from the exact meaning of the law; and
besides this he touched, though briefly, on the merits of the case, and
on the crying injustice of the sentence. the tone of his speech was one
of apology to the senators, who, with their penetration and judicial
wisdom, could not help seeing and understanding it all better than he
could. he was obliged to speak only because the duty he had undertaken
forced him to do so.

after fanarin’s speech one might have thought that there could not
remain the least doubt that the senate ought to repeal the decision of
the court. when he had finished his speech, fanarin looked round with a
smile of triumph, seeing which nekhludoff felt certain that the case was
won. but when he looked at the senators he saw that fanarin smiled and
triumphed all alone. the senators and the public prosecutor did not
smile nor triumph, but looked like people wearied, and who were thinking
“we have often heard the like of you; it is all in vain,” and were only
too glad when he stopped and ceased uselessly detaining them there.
immediately after the end of the advocate’s speech the chairman turned
to the public prosecutor. selenin briefly and clearly expressed
himself in favour of leaving the decision of the court unaltered, as
he considered all the reasons for appealing inadequate. after this the
senators went out into the debating-room. they were divided in their
opinions. wolf was in favour of altering the decision. bay, when he
had understood the case, took up the same side with fervour, vividly
presenting the scene at the court to his companions as he clearly saw it
himself. nikitin, who always was on the side of severity and formality,
took up the other side. all depended on skovorodnikoff’s vote, and he
voted for rejecting the appeal, because nekhludoff’s determination to
marry the woman on moral grounds was extremely repugnant to him.

skovorodnikoff was a materialist, a darwinian, and counted every
manifestation of abstract morality, or, worse still, religion, not only
as a despicable folly, but as a personal affront to himself. all this
bother about a prostitute, and the presence of a celebrated advocate and
nekhludoff in the senate were in the highest degree repugnant to him.
so he shoved his beard into his mouth and made faces, and very skilfully
pretended to know nothing of this case, excepting that the reasons for
an appeal were insufficient, and that he, therefore, agreed with the
chairman to leave the decision of the court unaltered.

so the sentence remained unrepealed.



chapter xxii.

an old friend.

“terrible,” said nekhludoff, as he went out into the waiting-room with
the advocate, who was arranging the papers in his portfolio. “in a
matter which is perfectly clear they attach all the importance to the
form and reject the appeal. terrible!”

“the case was spoiled in the criminal court,” said the advocate.

“and selenin, too, was in favour of the rejection. terrible! terrible!”
 nekhludoff repeated. “what is to be done now?”

“we will appeal to his majesty, and you can hand in the petition
yourself while you are here. i will write it for you.”

at this moment little wolf, with his stars and uniform, came out into
the waiting-room and approached nekhludoff. “it could not be helped,
dear prince. the reasons for an appeal were not sufficient,” he said,
shrugging his narrow shoulders and closing his eyes, and then he went
his way.

after wolf, selenin came out too, having heard from the senators that
his old friend nekhludoff was there.

“well, i never expected to see you here,” he said, coming up to
nekhludoff, and smiling only with his lips while his eyes remained sad.
“i did not know you were in petersburg.”

“and i did not know you were public prosecutor-in-chief.”

“how is it you are in the senate?” asked selenin. “i had heard, by the
way, that you were in petersburg. but what are you doing here?”

“here? i am here because i hoped to find justice and save a woman
innocently condemned.”

“what woman?”

“the one whose case has just been decided.”

“oh! maslova’s case,” said selenin, suddenly remembering it. “the appeal
had no grounds whatever.”

“it is not the appeal; it’s the woman who is innocent, and is being
punished.”

selenin sighed. “that may well be, but----”

“not _may be_, but is.”

“how do you know?”

“because i was on the jury. i know how we made the mistake.”

selenin became thoughtful. “you should have made a statement at the
time,” he said.

“i did make the statement.”

“it should have been put down in an official report. if this had been
added to the petition for the appeal--”

“yes, but still, as it is, the verdict is evidently absurd.”

“the senate has no right to say so. if the senate took upon itself to
repeal the decision of the law courts according to its own views as
to the justice of the decisions in themselves, the verdict of the jury
would lose all its meaning, not to mention that the senate would have
no basis to go upon, and would run the risk of infringing justice rather
than upholding it,” said selenin, calling to mind the case that had just
been heard.

“all i know is that this woman is quite innocent, and that the last
hope of saving her from an unmerited punishment is gone. the grossest
injustice has been confirmed by the highest court.”

“it has not been confirmed. the senate did not and cannot enter into
the merits of the case in itself,” said selenin. always busy and rarely
going out into society, he had evidently heard nothing of nekhludoff’s
romance. nekhludoff noticed it, and made up his mind that it was best to
say nothing about his special relations with maslova.

“you are probably staying with your aunt,” selenin remarked, apparently
wishing to change the subject. “she told me you were here yesterday, and
she invited me to meet you in the evening, when some foreign preacher
was to lecture,” and selenin again smiled only with his lips.

“yes, i was there, but left in disgust,” said nekhludoff angrily, vexed
that selenin had changed the subject.

“why with disgust? after all, it is a manifestation of religious
feeling, though one-sided and sectarian,” said selenin.

“why, it’s only some kind of whimsical folly.”

“oh, dear, no. the curious thing is that we know the teaching of our
church so little that we see some new kind of revelation in what are,
after all, our own fundamental dogmas,” said selenin, as if hurrying to
let his old friend know his new views.

nekhludoff looked at selenin scrutinisingly and with surprise, and
selenin dropped his eyes, in which appeared an expression not only of
sadness but also of ill-will.

“do you, then, believe in the dogmas of the church?” nekhludoff asked.

“of course i do,” replied selenin, gazing straight into nekhludoff’s
eyes with a lifeless look.

nekhludoff sighed. “it is strange,” he said.

“however, we shall have a talk some other time,” said selenin. “i
am coming,” he added, in answer to the usher, who had respectfully
approached him. “yes, we must meet again,” he went on with a sigh. “but
will it be possible for me to find you? you will always find me in at
seven o’clock. my address is nadejdinskaya,” and he gave the number.
“ah, time does not stand still,” and he turned to go, smiling only with
his lips.

“i will come if i can,” said nekhludoff, feeling that a man once
near and dear to him had, by this brief conversation, suddenly become
strange, distant, and incomprehensible, if not hostile to him.



chapter xxiii.

the public prosecutor.

when nekhludoff knew selenin as a student, he was a good son, a true
friend, and for his years an educated man of the world, with much tact;
elegant, handsome, and at the same time truthful and honest. he learned
well, without much exertion and with no pedantry, receiving gold medals
for his essays. he considered the service of mankind, not only in words
but in acts, to be the aim of his young life. he saw no other way of
being useful to humanity than by serving the state. therefore, as soon
as he had completed his studies, he systematically examined all the
activities to which he might devote his life, and decided to enter the
second department of the chancellerie, where the laws are drawn up, and
he did so. but, in spite of the most scrupulous and exact discharge of
the duties demanded of him, this service gave no satisfaction to his
desire of being useful, nor could he awake in himself the consciousness
that he was doing “the right thing.”

this dissatisfaction was so much increased by the friction with his very
small-minded and vain fellow officials that he left the chancellerie and
entered the senate. it was better there, but the same dissatisfaction
still pursued him; he felt it to be very different from what he had
expected, and from what ought to be.

and now that he was in the senate his relatives obtained for him the
post of gentleman of the bedchamber, and he had to go in a carriage,
dressed in an embroidered uniform and a white linen apron, to thank
all sorts of people for having placed him in the position of a lackey.
however much he tried he could find no reasonable explanation for the
existence of this post, and felt, more than in the senate, that it
was not “the right thing,” and yet he could not refuse it for fear of
hurting those who felt sure they were giving him much pleasure by this
appointment, and because it flattered the lowest part of his nature. it
pleased him to see himself in a mirror in his gold-embroidered uniform,
and to accept the deference paid him by some people because of his
position.

something of the same kind happened when he married. a very brilliant
match, from a worldly point of view, was arranged for him, and he
married chiefly because by refusing he would have had to hurt the
young lady who wished to be married to him, and those who arranged the
marriage, and also because a marriage with a nice young girl of noble
birth flattered his vanity and gave him pleasure. but this marriage
very soon proved to be even less “the right thing” than the government
service and his position at court.

after the birth of her first child the wife decided to have no more,
and began leading that luxurious worldly life in which he now had to
participate whether he liked or not.

she was not particularly handsome, and was faithful to him, and she
seemed, in spite of all the efforts it cost her, to derive nothing but
weariness from the life she led, yet she perseveringly continued to live
it, though it was poisoning her husband’s life. and all his efforts
to alter this life was shattered, as against a stone wall, by her
conviction, which all her friends and relatives supported, that all was
as it should be.

the child, a little girl with bare legs and long golden curls, was a
being perfectly foreign to him, chiefly because she was trained quite
otherwise than he wished her to be. there sprung up between the husband
and wife the usual misunderstanding, without even the wish to understand
each other, and then a silent warfare, hidden from outsiders and
tempered by decorum. all this made his life at home a burden, and became
even less “the right thing” than his service and his post.

but it was above all his attitude towards religion which was not “the
right thing.” like every one of his set and his time, by the growth of
his reason he broke without the least effort the nets of the religious
superstitions in which he was brought up, and did not himself exactly
know when it was that he freed himself of them. being earnest and
upright, he did not, during his youth and intimacy with nekhludoff as a
student, conceal his rejection of the state religion. but as years
went on and he rose in the service, and especially at the time of the
reaction towards conservatism in society, his spiritual freedom stood in
his way.

at home, when his father died, he had to be present at the masses
said for his soul, and his mother wished him to go to confession or to
communion, and it was in a way expected, by public opinion, but above
all, government service demanded that he should be present at all sorts
of services, consecrations, thanksgivings, and the like. hardly a day
passed without some outward religious form having to be observed.

when present at these services he had to pretend that he believed in
something which he did not believe in, and being truthful he could not
do this. the alternative was, having made up his mind that all these
outward signs were deceitful, to alter his life in such a way that he
would not have to be present at such ceremonials. but to do what
seemed so simple would have cost a great deal. besides encountering the
perpetual hostility of all those who were near to him, he would have to
give up the service and his position, and sacrifice his hopes of being
useful to humanity by his service, now and in the future. to make such a
sacrifice one would have to be firmly convinced of being right.

and he was firmly convinced he was right, as no educated man of our
time can help being convinced who knows a little history and how the
religions, and especially church christianity, originated.

but under the stress of his daily life he, a truthful man, allowed a
little falsehood to creep in. he said that in order to do justice to
an unreasonable thing one had to study the unreasonable thing. it was a
little falsehood, but it sunk him into the big falsehood in which he was
now caught.

before putting to himself the question whether the orthodoxy in which
he was born and bred, and which every one expected him to accept, and
without which he could not continue his useful occupation, contained the
truth, he had already decided the answer. and to clear up the question
he did not read voltaire, schopenhauer, herbert spencer, or comte, but
the philosophical works of hegel and the religious works of vinet and
khomyakoff, and naturally found in them what he wanted, i.e., something
like peace of mind and a vindication of that religious teaching in which
he was educated, which his reason had long ceased to accept, but without
which his whole life was filled with unpleasantness which could all be
removed by accepting the teaching.

and so he adopted all the usual sophistries which go to prove that
a single human reason cannot know the truth, that the truth is only
revealed to an association of men, and can only be known by revelation,
that revelation is kept by the church, etc. and so he managed to be
present at prayers, masses for the dead, to confess, make signs of the
cross in front of icons, with a quiet mind, without being conscious of
the lie, and to continue in the service which gave him the feeling of
being useful and some comfort in his joyless family life. although he
believed this, he felt with his entire being that this religion of his,
more than all else, was not “the right thing,” and that is why his eyes
always looked sad.

and seeing nekhludoff, whom he had known before all these lies had
rooted themselves within him, reminded him of what he then was. it was
especially after he had hurried to hint at his religious views that he
had most strongly felt all this “not the right thing,” and had become
painfully sad. nekhludoff felt it also after the first joy of meeting
his old friend had passed, and therefore, though they promised each
other to meet, they did not take any steps towards an interview, and did
not again see each other during this stay of nekhludoff’s in petersburg.



chapter xxiv.

mariette tempts nekhludoff.

when they left the senate, nekhludoff and the advocate walked on
together, the advocate having given the driver of his carriage orders
to follow them. the advocate told nekhludoff the story of the chief of a
government department, about whom the senators had been talking: how the
thing was found out, and how the man, who according to law should
have been sent to the mines, had been appointed governor of a town
in siberia. then he related with particular pleasure how several
high-placed persons stole a lot of money collected for the erection of
the still unfinished monument which they had passed that morning; also,
how the mistress of so-and-so got a lot of money at the stock exchange,
and how so-and-so agreed with so-and-so to sell him his wife. the
advocate began another story about a swindle, and all sorts of crimes
committed by persons in high places, who, instead of being in prison,
sat on presidential chairs in all sorts of government institutions.
these tales, of which the advocate seemed to have an unending supply,
gave him much pleasure, showing as they did, with perfect clearness,
that his means of getting money were quite just and innocent compared
to the means which the highest officials in petersburg made use of.
the advocate was therefore surprised when nekhludoff took an isvostchik
before hearing the end of the story, said good-bye, and left him.
nekhludoff felt very sad. it was chiefly the rejection of the appeal by
the senate, confirming the senseless torments that the innocent maslova
was enduring, that saddened him, and also the fact that this rejection
made it still harder for him to unite his fate with hers. the stories
about existing evils, which the advocate recounted with such relish,
heightened his sadness, and so did the cold, unkind look that the
once sweet-natured, frank, noble selenin had given him, and which kept
recurring to his mind.

on his return the doorkeeper handed him a note, and said, rather
scornfully, that some kind of woman had written it in the hall. it was
a note from shoustova’s mother. she wrote that she had come to thank
her daughter’s benefactor and saviour, and to implore him to come to see
them on the vasilievsky, 5th line, house no. --. this was very necessary
because of vera doukhova. he need not be afraid that they would weary
him with expressions of gratitude. they would not speak their gratitude,
but be simply glad to see him. would he not come next morning, if he
could?

there was another note from bogotyreff, a former fellow-officer,
aide-de-camp to the emperor, whom nekhludoff had asked to hand
personally to the emperor his petition on behalf of the sectarians.
bogotyreff wrote, in his large, firm hand, that he would put the
petition into the emperor’s own hands, as he had promised; but that it
had occurred to him that it might be better for nekhludoff first to go
and see the person on whom the matter depended.

after the impressions received during the last few days, nekhludoff felt
perfectly hopeless of getting anything done. the plans he had formed
in moscow seemed now something like the dreams of youth, which are
inevitably followed by disillusion when life comes to be faced. still,
being now in petersburg, he considered it his duty to do all he had
intended, and he resolved next day, after consulting bogotyreff, to
act on his advice and see the person on whom the case of the sectarians
depended.

he got out the sectarians’ petition from his portfolio, and began
reading it over, when there was a knock at his door, and a footman came
in with a message from the countess katerina ivanovna, who asked him to
come up and have a cup of tea with her.

nekhludoff said he would come at once, and having put the papers back
into the portfolio, he went up to his aunt’s. he looked out of a window
on his way, and saw mariette’s pair of bays standing in front of the
house, and he suddenly brightened and felt inclined to smile.

mariette, with a hat on her head, not in black but with a light dress
of many shades, sat with a cup in her hand beside the countess’s easy
chair, prattling about something while her beautiful, laughing
eyes glistened. she had said something funny--something indecently
funny--just as nekhludoff entered the room. he knew it by the way she
laughed, and by the way the good-natured countess katerina ivanovna’s
fat body was shaking with laughter; while mariette, her smiling mouth
slightly drawn to one side, her head a little bent, a peculiarly
mischievous expression in her merry, energetic face, sat silently
looking at her companion. from a few words which he overheard,
nekhludoff guessed that they were talking of the second piece of
petersburg news, the episode of the siberian governor, and that it was
in reference to this subject that mariette had said something so funny
that the countess could not control herself for a long time.

“you will kill me,” she said, coughing.

after saying “how d’you do?” nekhludoff sat down. he was about to
censure mariette in his mind for her levity when, noticing the serious
and even slightly dissatisfied look in his eyes, she suddenly, to please
him, changed not only the expression of her face, but also the attitude
of her mind; for she felt the wish to please him as soon as she looked
at him. she suddenly turned serious, dissatisfied with her life, as if
seeking and striving after something; it was not that she pretended, but
she really reproduced in herself the very same state of mind that he was
in, although it would have been impossible for her to express in words
what was the state of nekhludoff’s mind at that moment.

she asked him how he had accomplished his tasks. he told her about his
failure in the senate and his meeting selenin.

“oh, what a pure soul! he is, indeed, a chevalier sans peur et sans
reproche. a pure soul!” said both ladies, using the epithet commonly
applied to selenin in petersburg society.

“what is his wife like?” nekhludoff asked.

“his wife? well, i do not wish to judge, but she does not understand
him.”

“is it possible that he, too, was for rejecting the appeal?” mariette
asked with real sympathy. “it is dreadful. how sorry i am for her,” she
added with a sigh.

he frowned, and in order to change the subject began to speak about
shoustova, who had been imprisoned in the fortress and was now set free
through the influence of mariette’s husband. he thanked her for her
trouble, and was going on to say how dreadful he thought it, that this
woman and the whole of her family had suffered merely, because no one
had reminded the authorities about them, but mariette interrupted him
and expressed her own indignation.

“say nothing about it to me,” she said. “when my husband told me she
could be set free, it was this that struck me, ‘what was she kept in
prison for if she is innocent?’” she went on expressing what nekhludoff
was about to say.

“it is revolting--revolting.”

countess katerina ivanovna noticed that mariette was coquetting with her
nephew, and this amused her. “what do you think?” she said, when they
were silent. “supposing you come to aline’s to-morrow night. kiesewetter
will be there. and you, too,” she said, turning to mariette. “_il vous a
remarque_,” she went on to her nephew. “he told me that what you say (i
repeated it all to him) is a very good sign, and that you will certainly
come to christ. you must come absolutely. tell him to, mariette, and
come yourself.”

“countess, in the first place, i have no right whatever to give any kind
of advice to the prince,” said mariette, and gave nekhludoff a look that
somehow established a full comprehension between them of their attitude
in relation to the countess’s words and evangelicalism in general.
“secondly, i do not much care, you know.”

“yes, i know you always do things the wrong way round, and according to
your own ideas.”

“my own ideas? i have faith like the most simple peasant woman,” said
mariette with a smile. “and, thirdly, i am going to the french theatre
to-morrow night.”

“ah! and have you seen that--what’s her name?” asked countess katerina
ivanovna. mariette gave the name of a celebrated french actress.

“you must go, most decidedly; she is wonderful.”

“whom am i to see first, ma tante--the actress or the preacher?”
 nekhludoff said with a smile.

“please don’t catch at my words.”

“i should think the preacher first and then the actress, or else the
desire for the sermon might vanish altogether,” said nekhludoff.

“no; better begin with the french theatre, and do penance afterwards.”

“now, then, you are not to hold me up for ridicule. the preacher is the
preacher and the theatre is the theatre. one need not weep in order to
be saved. one must have faith, and then one is sure to be gay.”

“you, ma tante, preach better than any preacher.”

“do you know what?” said mariette. “come into my box to-morrow.”

“i am afraid i shall not be able to.”

the footman interrupted the conversation by announcing a visitor. it
was the secretary of a philanthropic society of which the countess was
president.

“oh, that is the dullest of men. i think i shall receive him out there,
and return to you later on. mariette, give him his tea,” said the
countess, and left the room, with her quick, wriggling walk.

mariette took the glove off her firm, rather flat hand, the fourth
finger of which was covered with rings.

“want any?” she said, taking hold of the silver teapot, under which a
spirit lamp was burning, and extending her little finger curiously. her
face looked sad and serious.

“it is always terribly painful to me to notice that people whose opinion
i value confound me with the position i am placed in.” she seemed ready
to cry as she said these last words. and though these words had no
meaning, or at any rate a very indefinite meaning, they seemed to be of
exceptional depth, meaning, or goodness to nekhludoff, so much was he
attracted by the look of the bright eyes which accompanied the words of
this young, beautiful, and well-dressed woman.

nekhludoff looked at her in silence, and could not take his eyes from
her face.

“you think i do not understand you and all that goes on in you. why,
everybody knows what you are doing. _c’est le secret de polichinelle_.
and i am delighted with your work, and think highly of you.”

“really, there is nothing to be delighted with; and i have done so
little as yet.”

“no matter. i understand your feelings, and i understand her. all
right, all right. i will say nothing more about it,” she said, noticing
displeasure on his face. “but i also understand that after seeing all
the suffering and the horror in the prisons,” mariette went on, her only
desire that of attracting him, and guessing with her woman’s instinct
what was dear and important to him, “you wish to help the sufferers,
those who are made to suffer so terribly by other men, and their cruelty
and indifference. i understand the willingness to give one’s life, and
could give mine in such a cause, but we each have our own fate.”

“are you, then, dissatisfied with your fate?”

“i?” she asked, as if struck with surprise that such a question could
be put to her. “i have to be satisfied, and am satisfied. but there is a
worm that wakes up--”

“and he must not be allowed to fall asleep again. it is a voice that
must be obeyed,” nekhludoff said, falling into the trap.

many a time later on nekhludoff remembered with shame his talk with her.
he remembered her words, which were not so much lies as imitations of
his own, and her face, which seemed looking at him with sympathetic
attention when he told her about the terrors of the prison and of his
impressions in the country.

when the countess returned they were talking not merely like old, but
like exclusive friends who alone understood one another. they were
talking about the injustice of power, of the sufferings of the
unfortunate, the poverty of the people, yet in reality in the midst of
the sound of their talk their eyes, gazing at each other, kept asking,
“can you love me?” and answering, “i can,” and the sex-feeling, taking
the most unexpected and brightest forms, drew them to each other. as she
was going away she told him that she would always be willing to serve
him in any way she could, and asked him to come and see her, if only for
a moment, in the theatre next day, as she had a very important thing to
tell him about.

“yes, and when shall i see you again?” she added, with a sigh, carefully
drawing the glove over her jewelled hand.

“say you will come.”

nekhludoff promised.

that night, when nekhludoff was alone in his room, and lay down after
putting out his candle, he could not sleep. he thought of maslova, of
the decision of the senate, of his resolve to follow her in any case, of
his having given up the land. the face of mariette appeared to him as if
in answer to those thoughts--her look, her sigh, her words, “when shall
i see you again?” and her smile seemed vivid as if he really saw her,
and he also smiled. “shall i be doing right in going to siberia? and
have i done right in divesting myself of my wealth?” and the answers to
the questions on this petersburg night, on which the daylight streamed
into the window from under the blind, were quite indefinite. all seemed
mixed in his head. he recalled his former state of mind, and the former
sequence of his thoughts, but they had no longer their former power or
validity.

“and supposing i have invented all this, and am unable to live it
through--supposing i repent of having acted right,” he thought; and
unable to answer he was seized with such anguish and despair as he had
long not felt. unable to free himself from his perplexity, he fell into
a heavy sleep, such as he had slept after a heavy loss at cards.



chapter xxv.

lydia shoustova’s home.

nekhludoff awoke next morning feeling as if he had been guilty of some
iniquity the day before. he began considering. he could not remember
having done anything wrong; he had committed no evil act, but he had had
evil thoughts. he had thought that all his present resolutions to marry
katusha and to give up his land were unachievable dreams; that he should
be unable to bear it; that it was artificial, unnatural; and that he
would have to go on living as he lived.

he had committed no evil action, but, what was far worse than an
evil action, he had entertained evil thoughts whence all evil actions
proceed. an evil action may not be repeated, and can be repented of; but
evil thoughts generate all evil actions.

an evil action only smooths the path for other evil acts; evil thoughts
uncontrollably drag one along that path.

when nekhludoff repeated in his mind the thoughts of the day before, he
was surprised that he could for a moment have believed these thoughts.
however new and difficult that which he had decided to do might be, he
knew that it was the only possible way of life for him now, and however
easy and natural it might have been to return to his former state, he
knew that state to be death.

yesterday’s temptation seemed like the feeling when one awakes from deep
sleep, and, without feeling sleepy, wants to lie comfortably in bed a
little longer, yet knows that it is time to rise and commence the glad
and important work that awaits one.

on that, his last day in petersburg, he went in the morning to the
vasilievski ostrov to see shoustova. shoustova lived on the second
floor, and having been shown the back stairs, nekhludoff entered
straight into the hot kitchen, which smelt strongly of food. an elderly
woman, with turned-up sleeves, with an apron and spectacles, stood by
the fire stirring something in a steaming pan.

“whom do you want?” she asked severely, looking at him over her
spectacles.

before nekhludoff had time to answer, an expression of fright and joy
appeared on her face.

“oh, prince!” she exclaimed, wiping her hands on her apron. “but why
have you come the back way? our benefactor! i am her mother. they have
nearly killed my little girl. you have saved us,” she said, catching
hold of nekhludoff’s hand and trying to kiss it.

“i went to see you yesterday. my sister asked me to. she is here. this
way, this way, please,” said shoustova’s mother, as she led the way
through a narrow door, and a dark passage, arranging her hair and
pulling at her tucked-up skirt. “my sister’s name is kornilova. you must
have heard of her,” she added, stopping before a closed door. “she was
mixed up in a political affair. an extremely clever woman!”

shoustova’s mother opened the door and showed nekhludoff into a little
room where on a sofa with a table before it sat a plump, short girl with
fair hair that curled round her pale, round face, which was very like
her mother’s. she had a striped cotton blouse on.

opposite her, in an armchair, leaning forward, so that he was nearly
bent double, sat a young fellow with a slight, black beard and
moustaches.

“lydia, prince nekhludoff!” he said.

the pale girl jumped up, nervously pushing back a lock of hair behind
her ear, and gazing at the newcomer with a frightened look in her large,
grey eyes.

“so you are that dangerous woman whom vera doukhova wished me to
intercede for?” nekhludoff asked, with a smile.

“yes, i am,” said lydia shoustova, her broad, kind, child-like smile
disclosing a row of beautiful teeth. “it was aunt who was so anxious to
see you. aunt!” she called out, in a pleasant, tender voice through a
door.

“your imprisonment grieved vera doukhova very much,” said nekhludoff.

“take a seat here, or better here,” said shoustova, pointing to the
battered easy-chair from which the young man had just risen.

“my cousin, zakharov,” she said, noticing that nekhludoff looked at the
young man.

the young man greeted the visitor with a smile as kindly as shoustova’s,
and when nekhludoff sat down he brought himself another chair, and sat
by his side. a fair-haired schoolboy of about 10 also came into the room
and silently sat down on the window-sill.

“vera doukhova is a great friend of my aunt’s, but i hardly know her,”
 said shoustova.

then a woman with a very pleasant face, with a white blouse and leather
belt, came in from the next room.

“how do you do? thanks for coming,” she began as soon as she had taken
the place next shoustova’s on the sofa.

“well, and how is vera. you have seen her? how does she bear her fate?”

“she does not complain,” said nekhludoff. “she says she feels perfectly
happy.”’

“ah, that’s like vera. i know her,” said the aunt, smiling and shaking
her head. “one must know her. she has a fine character. everything for
others; nothing for herself.”

“no, she asked nothing for herself, but only seemed concerned about your
niece. what seemed to trouble her most was, as she said, that your niece
was imprisoned for nothing.”

“yes, that’s true,” said the aunt. “it is a dreadful business. she
suffered, in reality, because of me.”

“not at all, aunt. i should have taken the papers without you all the
same.”

“allow me to know better,” said the aunt. “you see,” she went on to
nekhludoff, “it all happened because a certain person asked me to keep
his papers for a time, and i, having no house at the time, brought them
to her. and that very night the police searched her room and took her
and the papers, and have kept her up to now, demanding that she should
say from whom she had them.”

“but i never told them,” said shoustova quickly, pulling nervously at a
lock that was not even out of place.

“i never said you did,” answered the aunt.

“if they took mitin up it was certainly not through me,” said shoustova,
blushing, and looking round uneasily.

“don’t speak about it, lydia dear,” said her mother.

“why not? i should like to relate it,” said shoustova, no longer smiling
nor pulling her lock, but twisting it round her finger and getting
redder.

“don’t forget what happened yesterday when you began talking about it.”

“not at all---leave me alone, mamma. i did not tell, i only kept quiet.
when he examined me about mitin and about aunt, i said nothing, and told
him i would not answer.”

“then this--petrov--”

“petrov is a spy, a gendarme, and a blackguard,” put in the aunt, to
explain her niece’s words to nekhludoff.

“then he began persuading,” continued shoustova, excitedly and
hurriedly. “‘anything you tell me,’ he said, ‘can harm no one; on the
contrary, if you tell me, we may be able to set free innocent people
whom we may be uselessly tormenting.’ well, i still said i would not
tell. then he said, ‘all right, don’t tell, but do not deny what i am
going to say.’ and he named mitin.”

“don’t talk about it,” said the aunt.

“oh, aunt, don’t interrupt,” and she went on pulling the lock of hair
and looking round. “and then, only fancy, the next day i hear--they let
me know by knocking at the wall--that mitin is arrested. well, i think
i have betrayed him, and this tormented me so--it tormented me so that i
nearly went mad.”

“and it turned out that it was not at all because of you he was taken
up?”

“yes, but i didn’t know. i think, ‘there, now, i have betrayed him.’ i
walk and walk up and down from wall to wall, and cannot help thinking.
i think, ‘i have betrayed him.’ i lie down and cover myself up, and hear
something whispering, ‘betrayed! betrayed mitin! mitin betrayed!’ i
know it is an hallucination, but cannot help listening. i wish to
fall asleep, i cannot. i wish not to think, and cannot cease. that is
terrible!” and as shoustova spoke she got more and more excited, and
twisted and untwisted the lock of hair round her finger.

“lydia, dear, be calm,” the mother said, touching her shoulder.

but shoustova could not stop herself.

“it is all the more terrible--” she began again, but did not finish, and
jumping up with a cry rushed out of the room.

her mother turned to follow her.

“they ought to be hanged, the rascals!” said the schoolboy who was
sitting on the window-sill.

“what’s that?” said the mother.

“i only said--oh, it’s nothing,” the schoolboy answered, and taking a
cigarette that lay on the table, he began to smoke.



chapter xxvi.

lydia’s aunt.

“yes, that solitary confinement is terrible for the young,” said the
aunt, shaking her head and also lighting a cigarette.

“i should say for every one,” nekhludoff replied.

“no, not for all,” answered the aunt. “for the real revolutionists, i
have been told, it is rest and quiet. a man who is wanted by the police
lives in continual anxiety, material want, and fear for himself and
others, and for his cause, and at last, when he is taken up and it is
all over, and all responsibility is off his shoulders, he can sit and
rest. i have been told they actually feel joyful when taken up. but the
young and innocent (they always first arrest the innocent, like lydia),
for them the first shock is terrible. it is not that they deprive you of
freedom; and the bad food and bad air--all that is nothing. three times
as many privations would be easily borne if it were not for the moral
shock when one is first taken.”

“have you experienced it?”

“i? i was twice in prison,” she answered, with a sad, gentle smile.
“when i was arrested for the first time i had done nothing. i was 22,
had a child, and was expecting another. though the loss of freedom and
the parting with my child and husband were hard, they were nothing when
compared with what i felt when i found out that i had ceased being a
human creature and had become a thing. i wished to say good-bye to my
little daughter. i was told to go and get into the trap. i asked where i
was being taken to. the answer was that i should know when i got there.
i asked what i was accused of, but got no reply. after i had been
examined, and after they had undressed me and put numbered prison
clothes on me, they led me to a vault, opened a door, pushed me in, and
left me alone; a sentinel, with a loaded gun, paced up and down in front
of my door, and every now and then looked in through a crack--i felt
terribly depressed. what struck me most at the time was that the
gendarme officer who examined me offered me a cigarette. so he knew that
people liked smoking, and must know that they liked freedom and light;
and that mothers love their children, and children their mothers. then
how could they tear me pitilessly from all that was dear to me, and
lock me up in prison like a wild animal? that sort of thing could not
be borne without evil effects. any one who believes in god and men, and
believes that men love one another, will cease to believe it after all
that. i have ceased to believe in humanity since then, and have grown
embittered,” she finished, with a smile.

shoustova’s mother came in at the door through which her daughter had
gone out, and said that lydia was very much upset, and would not come in
again.

“and what has this young life been ruined for?” said the aunt. “what is
especially painful to me is that i am the involuntary cause of it.”

“she will recover in the country, with god’s help,” said the mother. “we
shall send her to her father.”

“yes, if it were not for you she would have perished altogether,” said
the aunt. “thank you. but what i wished to see you for is this: i wished
to ask you to take a letter to vera doukhova,” and she got the letter
out of her pocket.

“the letter is not closed; you may read and tear it up, or hand it to
her, according to how far it coincides with your principles,” she said.
“it contains nothing compromising.”

nekhludoff took the letter, and, having promised to give it to vera
doukhova, he took his leave and went away. he sealed the letter without
reading it, meaning to take it to its destination.



chapter xxvii.

the state church and the people.

the last thing that kept nekhludoff in petersburg was the case of the
sectarians, whose petition he intended to get his former fellow-officer,
aide-de-camp bogatyreff, to hand to the tsar. he came to bogatyreff in
the morning, and found him about to go out, though still at breakfast.
bogatyreff was not tall, but firmly built and wonderfully strong (he
could bend a horseshoe), a kind, honest, straight, and even liberal man.
in spite of these qualities, he was intimate at court, and very fond of
the tsar and his family, and by some strange method he managed, while
living in that highest circle, to see nothing but the good in it and to
take no part in the evil and corruption. he never condemned anybody
nor any measure, and either kept silent or spoke in a bold, loud voice,
almost shouting what he had to say, and often laughing in the same
boisterous manner. and he did not do it for diplomatic reasons, but
because such was his character.

“ah, that’s right that you have come. would you like some breakfast?
sit down, the beefsteaks are fine! i always begin with something
substantial--begin and finish, too. ha! ha! ha! well, then, have a glass
of wine,” he shouted, pointing to a decanter of claret. “i have been
thinking of you. i will hand on the petition. i shall put it into his
own hands. you may count on that, only it occurred to me that it would
be best for you to call on toporoff.”

nekhludoff made a wry face at the mention of toporoff.

“it all depends on him. he will be consulted, anyhow. and perhaps he may
himself meet your wishes.”

“if you advise it i shall go.”

“that’s right. well, and how does petersburg agree with you?” shouted
bogatyreff. “tell me. eh?”

“i feel myself getting hypnotised,” replied nekhludoff.

“hypnotised!” bogatyreff repeated, and burst out laughing. “you won’t
have anything? well, just as you please,” and he wiped his moustaches
with his napkin. “then you’ll go? eh? if he does not do it, give the
petition to me, and i shall hand it on to-morrow.” shouting these words,
he rose, crossed himself just as naturally as he had wiped his mouth,
and began buckling on his sword.

“and now good-bye; i must go. we are both going out,” said nekhludoff,
and shaking bogatyreff’s strong, broad hand, and with the sense of
pleasure which the impression of something healthy and unconsciously
fresh always gave him, nekhludoff parted from bogatyreff on the
door-steps.

though he expected no good result from his visit, still nekhludoff,
following bogatyreff’s advice, went to see toporoff, on whom the
sectarians’ fate depended.

the position occupied by toporoff, involving as it did an incongruity of
purpose, could only be held by a dull man devoid of moral sensibility.
toporoff possessed both these negative qualities. the incongruity of the
position he occupied was this. it was his duty to keep up and to defend,
by external measures, not excluding violence, that church which, by its
own declaration, was established by god himself and could not be shaken
by the gates of hell nor by anything human. this divine and immutable
god-established institution had to be sustained and defended by a human
institution--the holy synod, managed by toporoff and his officials.
toporoff did not see this contradiction, nor did he wish to see it, and
he was therefore much concerned lest some romish priest, some pastor, or
some sectarian should destroy that church which the gates of hell could
not conquer.

toporoff, like all those who are quite destitute of the fundamental
religious feeling that recognises the equality and brotherhood of men,
was fully convinced that the common people were creatures entirely
different from himself, and that the people needed what he could very
well do without, for at the bottom of his heart he believed in nothing,
and found such a state very convenient and pleasant. yet he feared lest
the people might also come to such a state, and looked upon it as his
sacred duty, as he called it, to save the people therefrom.

a certain cookery book declares that some crabs like to be boiled alive.
in the same way he thought and spoke as if the people liked being kept
in superstition; only he meant this in a literal sense, whereas the
cookery book did not mean its words literally.

his feelings towards the religion he was keeping up were the same as
those of the poultry-keeper towards the carrion he fed his fowls on.
carrion was very disgusting, but the fowls liked it; therefore it was
right to feed the fowls on carrion. of course all this worship of the
images of the iberian, kasan and smolensk mothers of god was a gross
superstition, but the people liked it and believed in it, and therefore
the superstition must be kept up.

thus thought toporoff, not considering that the people only liked
superstition because there always have been, and still are, men like
himself who, being enlightened, instead of using their light to help
others to struggle out of their dark ignorance, use it to plunge them
still deeper into it.

when nekhludoff entered the reception-room toporoff was in his study
talking with an abbess, a lively and aristocratic lady, who was
spreading the greek orthodox faith in western russia among the uniates
(who acknowledge the pope of rome), and who have the greek religion
enforced on them. an official who was in the reception-room inquired
what nekhludoff wanted, and when he heard that nekhludoff meant to
hand in a petition to the emperor, he asked him if he would allow the
petition to be read first. nekhludoff gave it him, and the official took
it into the study. the abbess, with her hood and flowing veil and her
long train trailing behind, left the study and went out, her white hands
(with their well-tended nails) holding a topaz rosary. nekhludoff was
not immediately asked to come in. toporoff was reading the petition
and shaking his head. he was unpleasantly surprised by the clear and
emphatic wording of it.

“if it gets into the hands of the emperor it may cause
misunderstandings, and unpleasant questions may be asked,” he thought
as he read. then he put the petition on the table, rang, and ordered
nekhludoff to be asked in.

he remembered the case of the sectarians; he had had a petition from
them before. the case was this: these christians, fallen away from the
greek orthodox church, were first exhorted and then tried by law, but
were acquitted. then the archdeacon and the governor arranged, on the
plea that their marriages were illegal, to exile these sectarians,
separating the husbands, wives, and children. these fathers and
wives were now petitioning that they should not be parted. toporoff
recollected the first time the case came to his notice: he had at that
time hesitated whether he had not better put a stop to it. but then
he thought no harm could result from his confirming the decision to
separate and exile the different members of the sectarian families,
whereas allowing the peasant sect to remain where it was might have a
bad effect on the rest of the inhabitants of the place and cause them
to fall away from orthodoxy. and then the affair also proved the zeal
of the archdeacon, and so he let the case proceed along the lines it had
taken. but now that they had a defender such as nekhludoff, who had some
influence in petersburg, the case might be specially pointed out to the
emperor as something cruel, or it might get into the foreign papers.
therefore he at once took an unexpected decision.

“how do you do?” he said, with the air of a very busy man, receiving
nekhludoff standing, and at once starting on the business. “i know
this case. as soon as i saw the names i recollected this unfortunate
business,” he said, taking up the petition and showing it to nekhludoff.
“and i am much indebted to you for reminding me of it. it is the
over-zealousness of the provincial authorities.”

nekhludoff stood silent, looking with no kindly feelings at the
immovable, pale mask of a face before him.

“and i shall give orders that these measures should be revoked and the
people reinstated in their homes.”

“so that i need not make use of this petition?”

“i promise you most assuredly,” answered toporoff, laying a stress on
the word i, as if quite convinced that his honesty, his word was the
best guarantee. “it will be best if i write at once. take a seat,
please.”

he went up to the table and began to write. as nekhludoff sat down he
looked at the narrow, bald skull, at the fat, blue-veined hand that was
swiftly guiding the pen, and wondered why this evidently indifferent man
was doing what he did and why he was doing it with such care.

“well, here you are,” said toporoff, sealing the envelope; “you may let
your clients know,” and he stretched his lips to imitate a smile.

“then what did these people suffer for?” nekhludoff asked, as he took
the envelope.

toporoff raised his head and smiled, as if nekhludoff’s question gave
him pleasure. “that i cannot tell. all i can say is that the interests
of the people guarded by us are so important that too great a zeal
in matters of religion is not so dangerous or so harmful as the
indifference which is now spreading--”

“but how is it that in the name of religion the very first demands of
righteousness are violated--families are separated?”

toporoff continued to smile patronisingly, evidently thinking what
nekhludoff said very pretty. anything that nekhludoff could say he would
have considered very pretty and very one-sided, from the height of what
he considered his far-reaching office in the state.

“it may seem so from the point of view of a private individual,” he
said, “but from an administrative point of view it appears in a rather
different light. however, i must bid you good-bye, now,” said toporoff,
bowing his head and holding out his hand, which nekhludoff pressed.

“the interests of the people! your interests is what you mean!” thought
nekhludoff as he went out. and he ran over in his mind the people in
whom is manifested the activity of the institutions that uphold religion
and educate the people. he began with the woman punished for the
illicit sale of spirits, the boy for theft, the tramp for tramping, the
incendiary for setting a house on fire, the banker for fraud, and that
unfortunate lydia shoustova imprisoned only because they hoped to get
such information as they required from her. then he thought of the
sectarians punished for violating orthodoxy, and gourkevitch for wanting
constitutional government, and nekhludoff clearly saw that all these
people were arrested, locked up, exiled, not really because they
transgressed against justice or behaved unlawfully, but only because
they were an obstacle hindering the officials and the rich from enjoying
the property they had taken away from the people. and the woman who sold
wine without having a license, and the thief knocking about the town,
and lydia shoustova hiding proclamations, and the sectarians upsetting
superstitions, and gourkevitch desiring a constitution, were a real
hindrance. it seemed perfectly clear to nekhludoff that all these
officials, beginning with his aunt’s husband, the senators, and
toporoff, down to those clean and correct gentlemen who sat at the
tables in the ministry office, were not at all troubled by the fact that
that in such a state of things the innocent had to suffer, but were only
concerned how to get rid of the really dangerous, so that the rule
that ten guilty should escape rather than that one innocent should
be condemned was not observed, but, on the contrary, for the sake of
getting rid of one really dangerous person, ten who seemed dangerous
were punished, as, when cutting a rotten piece out of anything, one has
to cut away some that is good.

this explanation seemed very simple and clear to nekhludoff; but its
very simplicity and clearness made him hesitate to accept it. was it
possible that so complicated a phenomenon could have so simple and
terrible an explanation? was it possible that all these words about
justice, law, religion, and god, and so on, were mere words, hiding the
coarsest cupidity and cruelty?



chapter xxviii.

the meaning of mariette’s attraction.

nekhludoff would have left petersburg on the evening of the same day,
but he had promised mariette to meet her at the theatre, and though he
knew that he ought not to keep that promise, he deceived himself into
the belief that it would not be right to break his word.

“am i capable of withstanding these temptations?” he asked himself not
quite honestly. “i shall try for the last time.”

he dressed in his evening clothes, and arrived at the theatre during the
second act of the eternal dame aux camelias, in which a foreign actress
once again, and in a novel manner, showed how women die of consumption.

the theatre was quite full. mariette’s box was at once, and with great
deference, shown to nekhludoff at his request. a liveried servant stood
in the corridor outside; he bowed to nekhludoff as to one whom he knew,
and opened the door of the box.

all the people who sat and stood in the boxes on the opposite side,
those who sat near and those who were in the parterre, with their grey,
grizzly, bald, or curly heads--all were absorbed in watching the thin,
bony actress who, dressed in silks and laces, was wriggling before them,
and speaking in an unnatural voice.

some one called “hush!” when the door opened, and two streams, one of
cool, the other of hot, air touched nekhludoff’s face.

mariette and a lady whom he did not know, with a red cape and a big,
heavy head-dress, were in the box, and two men also, mariette’s
husband, the general, a tall, handsome man with a severe, inscrutable
countenance, a roman nose, and a uniform padded round the chest, and a
fair man, with a bit of shaved chin between pompous whiskers.

mariette, graceful, slight, elegant, her low-necked dress showing her
firm, shapely, slanting shoulders, with a little black mole where they
joined her neck, immediately turned, and pointed with her face to a
chair behind her in an engaging manner, and smiled a smile that seemed
full of meaning to nekhludoff.

the husband looked at him in the quiet way in which he did everything,
and bowed. in the look he exchanged with his wife, the master, the owner
of a beautiful woman, was to be seen at once.

when the monologue was over the theatre resounded with the clapping of
hands. mariette rose, and holding up her rustling silk skirt, went into
the back of the box and introduced nekhludoff to her husband.

the general, without ceasing to smile with his eyes, said he was very
pleased, and then sat inscrutably silent.

“i ought to have left to-day, had i not promised,” said nekhludoff to
mariette.

“if you do not care to see me,” said mariette, in answer to what his
words implied, “you will see a wonderful actress. was she not splendid
in the last scene?” she asked, turning to her husband.

the husband bowed his head.

“this sort of thing does not touch me,” said nekhludoff. “i have seen so
much real suffering lately that--”

“yes, sit down and tell me.”

the husband listened, his eyes smiling more and more ironically. “i have
been to see that woman whom they have set free, and who has been kept in
prison for so long; she is quite broken down.”

“that is the woman i spoke to you about,” mariette said to her husband.

“oh, yes, i was very pleased that she could be set free,” said the
husband quietly, nodding and smiling under his moustache with evident
irony, so it seemed to nekhludoff. “i shall go and have a smoke.”

nekhludoff sat waiting to hear what the something was that mariette had
to tell him. she said nothing, and did not even try to say anything, but
joked and spoke about the performance, which she thought ought to touch
nekhludoff. nekhludoff saw that she had nothing to tell, but only wished
to show herself to him in all the splendour of her evening toilet, with
her shoulders and little mole; and this was pleasant and yet repulsive
to him.

the charm that had veiled all this sort of thing from nekhludoff was
not removed, but it was as if he could see what lay beneath. looking at
mariette, he admired her, and yet he knew that she was a liar, living
with a husband who was making his career by means of the tears and lives
of hundreds and hundreds of people, and that she was quite indifferent
about it, and that all she had said the day before was untrue. what she
wanted--neither he nor she knew why--was to make him fall in love with
her. this both attracted and disgusted him. several times, on the point
of going away, he took up his hat, and then stayed on.

but at last, when the husband returned with a strong smell of tobacco
in his thick moustache, and looked at nekhludoff with a patronising,
contemptuous air, as if not recognising him, nekhludoff left the box
before the door was closed again, found his overcoat, and went out of
the theatre. as he was walking home along the nevski, he could not help
noticing a well-shaped and aggressively finely-dressed woman, who was
quietly walking in front of him along the broad asphalt pavement. the
consciousness of her detestable power was noticeable in her face and
the whole of her figure. all who met or passed that woman looked at her.
nekhludoff walked faster than she did and, involuntarily, also looked
her in the face. the face, which was probably painted, was handsome,
and the woman looked at him with a smile and her eyes sparkled. and,
curiously enough, nekhludoff was suddenly reminded of mariette, because
he again felt both attracted and disgusted just as when in the theatre.

having hurriedly passed her, nekhludoff turned off on to the morskaya,
and passed on to the embankment, where, to the surprise of a policeman,
he began pacing up and down the pavement.

“the other one gave me just such a smile when i entered the theatre,” he
thought, “and the meaning of the smile was the same. the only difference
is, that this one said plainly, ‘if you want me, take me; if not, go
your way,’ and the other one pretended that she was not thinking of
this, but living in some high and refined state, while this was really
at the root. besides, this one was driven to it by necessity, while
the other amused herself by playing with that enchanting, disgusting,
frightful passion. this woman of the street was like stagnant, smelling
water offered to those whose thirst was greater than their disgust; that
other one in the theatre was like the poison which, unnoticed, poisons
everything it gets into.”

nekhludoff recalled his liaison with the marechal’s wife, and shameful
memories rose before him.

“the animalism of the brute nature in man is disgusting,” thought he,
“but as long as it remains in its naked form we observe it from the
height of our spiritual life and despise it; and--whether one has
fallen or resisted--one remains what one was before. but when that
same animalism hides under a cloak of poetry and aesthetic feeling and
demands our worship--then we are swallowed up by it completely, and
worship animalism, no longer distinguishing good from evil. then it is
awful.”

nekhludoff perceived all this now as clearly as he saw the palace, the
sentinels, the fortress, the river, the boats, and the stock exchange.
and just as on this northern summer night there was no restful darkness
on the earth, but only a dismal, dull light coming from an invisible
source, so in nekhludoff’s soul there was no longer the restful
darkness, ignorance. everything seemed clear. it was clear that
everything considered important and good was insignificant and
repulsive, and that all the glamour and luxury hid the old, well-known
crimes, which not only remained unpunished but were adorned with all the
splendour which men were capable of inventing.

nekhludoff wished to forget all this, not to see it, but he could no
longer help seeing it. though he could not see the source of the light
which revealed it to him any more than he could see the source of the
light which lay over petersburg; and though the light appeared to
him dull, dismal, and unnatural, yet he could not help seeing what it
revealed, and he felt both joyful and anxious.



chapter xxix.

for her sake and for god’s.

on his return to moscow nekhludoff went at once to the prison hospital
to bring maslova the sad news that the senate had confirmed the decision
of the court, and that she must prepare to go to siberia. he had little
hope of the success of his petition to the emperor, which the advocate
had written for him, and which he now brought with him for maslova to
sign. and, strange to say, he did not at present even wish to succeed;
he had got used to the thought of going to siberia and living among the
exiled and the convicts, and he could not easily picture to himself how
his life and maslova’s would shape if she were acquitted. he remembered
the thought of the american writer, thoreau, who at the time when
slavery existed in america said that “under a government that
imprisons any unjustly the true place for a just man is also a prison.”
 nekhludoff, especially after his visit to petersburg and all he
discovered there, thought in the same way.

“yes, the only place befitting an honest man in russia at the present
time is a prison,” he thought, and even felt that this applied to him
personally, when he drove up to the prison and entered its walls.

the doorkeeper recognised nekhludoff, and told him at once that maslova
was no longer there.

“where is she, then?”

“in the cell again.”

“why has she been removed?” nekhludoff asked.

“oh, your excellency, what are such people?” said the doorkeeper,
contemptuously. “she’s been carrying on with the medical assistant, so
the head doctor ordered her back.”

nekhludoff had had no idea how near maslova and the state of her mind
were to him. he was stunned by the news.

he felt as one feels at the news of a great and unforeseen misfortune,
and his pain was very severe. his first feeling was one of shame. he,
with his joyful idea of the change that he imagined was going on in her
soul, now seemed ridiculous in his own eyes. he thought that all her
pretence of not wishing to accept his sacrifice, all the reproaches and
tears, were only the devices of a depraved woman, who wished to use
him to the best advantage. he seemed to remember having seen signs of
obduracy at his last interview with her. all this flashed through his
mind as he instinctively put on his hat and left the hospital.

“what am i to do now? am i still bound to her? has this action of hers
not set me free?” and as he put these questions to himself he knew at
once that if he considered himself free, and threw her up, he would be
punishing himself, and not her, which was what he wished to do, and he
was seized with fear.

“no, what has happened cannot alter--it can only strengthen my resolve.
let her do what flows from the state her mind is in. if it is carrying
on with the medical assistant, let her carry on with the medical
assistant; that is her business. i must do what my conscience demands of
me. and my conscience expects me to sacrifice my freedom. my resolution
to marry her, if only in form, and to follow wherever she may be sent,
remains unalterable.” nekhludoff said all this to himself with vicious
obstinacy as he left the hospital and walked with resolute steps towards
the big gates of the prison. he asked the warder on duty at the gate
to inform the inspector that he wished to see maslova. the warder knew
nekhludoff, and told him of an important change that had taken place
in the prison. the old inspector had been discharged, and a new, very
severe official appointed in his place.

“they are so strict nowadays, it’s just awful,” said the jailer. “he is
in here; they will let him know directly.”

the new inspector was in the prison and soon came to nekhludoff. he was
a tall, angular man, with high cheek bones, morose, and very slow in his
movements.

“interviews are allowed in the visiting room on the appointed days,” he
said, without looking at nekhludoff.

“but i have a petition to the emperor, which i want signed.”

“you can give it to me.”

“i must see the prisoner myself. i was always allowed to before.”

“that was so, before,” said the inspector, with a furtive glance at
nekhludoff.

“i have a permission from the governor,” insisted nekhludoff, and took
out his pocket-book.

“allow me,” said the inspector, taking the paper from nekhludoff with
his long, dry, white fingers, on the first of which was a gold ring,
still without looking him in the eyes. he read the paper slowly. “step
into the office, please.”

this time the office was empty. the inspector sat down by the table
and began sorting some papers that lay on it, evidently intending to be
present at the interview.

when nekhludoff asked whether he might see the political prisoner,
doukhova, the inspector answered, shortly, that he could not.
“interviews with political prisoners are not permitted,” he said, and
again fixed his attention on his papers. with a letter to doukhova in
his pocket, nekhludoff felt as if he had committed some offence, and his
plans had been discovered and frustrated.

when maslova entered the room the inspector raised his head, and,
without looking at either her or nekhludoff, remarked: “you may talk,”
 and went on sorting his papers. maslova had again the white jacket,
petticoat and kerchief on. when she came up to nekhludoff and saw his
cold, hard look, she blushed scarlet, and crumbling the hem of her
jacket with her hand, she cast down her eyes. her confusion, so it
seemed to nekhludoff, confirmed the hospital doorkeeper’s words.

nekhludoff had meant to treat her in the same way as before, but could
not bring himself to shake hands with her, so disgusting was she to him
now.

“i have brought you bad news,” he said, in a monotonous voice, without
looking at her or taking her hand. “the senate has refused.”

“i knew it would,” she said, in a strange tone, as if she were gasping
for breath.

formerly nekhludoff would have asked why she said she knew it would;
now he only looked at her. her eyes were full of tears. but this did not
soften him; it roused his irritation against her even more.

the inspector rose and began pacing up and down the room.

in spite of the disgust nekhludoff was feeling at the moment, he
considered it right to express his regret at the senate’s decision.

“you must not despair,” he said. “the petition to the emperor may meet
with success, and i hope---”

“i’m not thinking of that,” she said, looking piteously at him with her
wet, squinting eyes.

“what is it, then?”

“you have been to the hospital, and they have most likely told you about
me--”

“what of that? that is your affair,” said nekhludoff coldly, and
frowned. the cruel feeling of wounded pride that had quieted down rose
with renewed force when she mentioned the hospital.

“he, a man of the world, whom any girl of the best families would think
it happiness to marry, offered himself as a husband to this woman,
and she could not even wait, but began intriguing with the medical
assistant,” thought he, with a look of hatred.

“here, sign this petition,” he said, taking a large envelope from his
pocket, and laying the paper on the table. she wiped the tears with a
corner of her kerchief, and asked what to write and where.

he showed her, and she sat down and arranged the cuff of her right
sleeve with her left hand; he stood behind her, and silently looked
at her back, which shook with suppressed emotion, and evil and good
feelings were fighting in his breast--feelings of wounded pride and of
pity for her who was suffering--and the last feeling was victorious.

he could not remember which came first; did the pity for her first enter
his heart, or did he first remember his own sins--his own repulsive
actions, the very same for which he was condemning her? anyhow, he both
felt himself guilty and pitied her.

having signed the petition and wiped her inky finger on her petticoat,
she got up and looked at him.

“whatever happens, whatever comes of it, my resolve remains unchanged,”
 said nekhludoff. the thought that he had forgiven her heightened his
feeling of pity and tenderness for her, and he wished to comfort her. “i
will do what i have said; wherever they take you i shall be with you.”

“what’s the use?” she interrupted hurriedly, though her whole face
lighted up.

“think what you will want on the way--”

“i don’t know of anything in particular, thank you.”

the inspector came up, and without waiting for a remark from him
nekhludoff took leave, and went out with peace, joy, and love towards
everybody in his heart such as he had never felt before. the certainty
that no action of maslova could change his love for her filled him with
joy and raised him to a level which he had never before attained. let
her intrigue with the medical assistant; that was her business. he loved
her not for his own but for her sake and for god’s.

and this intrigue, for which maslova was turned out of the hospital,
and of which nekhludoff believed she was really guilty, consisted of the
following:

maslova was sent by the head nurse to get some herb tea from the
dispensary at the end of the corridor, and there, all alone, she found
the medical assistant, a tall man, with a blotchy face, who had for a
long time been bothering her. in trying to get away from him maslova
gave him such a push that he knocked his head against a shelf, from
which two bottles fell and broke. the head doctor, who was passing at
that moment, heard the sound of breaking glass, and saw maslova run out,
quite red, and shouted to her:

“ah, my good woman, if you start intriguing here, i’ll send you about
your business. what is the meaning of it?” he went on, addressing the
medical assistant, and looking at him over his spectacles.

the assistant smiled, and began to justify himself. the doctor gave no
heed to him, but, lifting his head so that he now looked through his
spectacles, he entered the ward. he told the inspector the same day to
send another more sedate assistant-nurse in maslova’s place. and this
was her “intrigue” with the medical assistant.

being turned out for a love intrigue was particularly painful to
maslova, because the relations with men, which had long been repulsive
to her, had become specially disgusting after meeting nekhludoff. the
thought that, judging her by her past and present position, every man,
the blotchy assistant among them, considered he had a right to offend
her, and was surprised at her refusal, hurt her deeply, and made her
pity herself and brought tears to her eyes.

when she went out to nekhludoff this time she wished to clear herself of
the false charge which she knew he would certainly have heard about. but
when she began to justify herself she felt he did not believe her, and
that her excuses would only strengthen his suspicions; tears choked her,
and she was silent.

maslova still thought and continued to persuade herself that she had
never forgiven him, and hated him, as she told him at their second
interview, but in reality she loved him again, and loved him so that she
did all he wished her to do; left off drinking, smoking, coquetting, and
entered the hospital because she knew he wished it. and if every time he
reminded her of it, she refused so decidedly to accept his sacrifice and
marry him, it was because she liked repeating the proud words she had
once uttered, and because she knew that a marriage with her would be a
misfortune for him.

she had resolutely made up her mind that she would not accept his
sacrifice, and yet the thought that he despised her and believed that
she still was what she had been, and did not notice the change that had
taken place in her, was very painful. that he could still think she had
done wrong while in the hospital tormented her more than the news that
her sentence was confirmed.



chapter xxx.

the astonishing institution called criminal law.

maslova might be sent off with the first gang of prisoners, therefore
nekhludoff got ready for his departure. but there was so much to be done
that he felt that he could not finish it, however much time he might
have. it was quite different now from what it had been. formerly he used
to be obliged to look for an occupation, the interest of which always
centred in one person, i.e., dmitri ivanovitch nekhludoff, and
yet, though every interest of his life was thus centred, all these
occupations were very wearisome. now all his occupations related to
other people and not to dmitri ivanovitch, and they were all interesting
and attractive, and there was no end to them. nor was this all. formerly
dmitri ivanovitch nekhludoff’s occupations always made him feel vexed
and irritable; now they produced a joyful state of mind. the business at
present occupying nekhludoff could be divided under three headings.
he himself, with his usual pedantry, divided it in that way, and
accordingly kept the papers referring to it in three different
portfolios. the first referred to maslova, and was chiefly that of
taking steps to get her petition to the emperor attended to, and
preparing for her probable journey to siberia.

the second was about his estates. in panovo he had given the land to
the peasants on condition of their paying rent to be put to their own
communal use. but he had to confirm this transaction by a legal deed,
and to make his will, in accordance with it. in kousminski the state of
things was still as he had first arranged it, i.e., he was to receive
the rent; but the terms had to be fixed, and also how much of the money
he would use to live on, and how much he would leave for the peasants’
use. as he did not know what his journey to siberia would cost him, he
could not decide to lose this revenue altogether, though he reduced the
income from it by half.

the third part of his business was to help the convicts, who applied
more and more often to him. at first when he came in contact with
the prisoners, and they appealed to him for help, he at once began
interceding for them, hoping to lighten their fate, but he soon had so
many applications that he felt the impossibility of attending to all of
them, and that naturally led him to take up another piece of work, which
at last roused his interest even more than the three first. this new
part of his business was finding an answer to the following questions:
what was this astonishing institution called criminal law, of which the
results were that in the prison, with some of the inmates of which
he had lately become acquainted, and in all those other places of
confinement, from the peter and paul fortress in petersburg to the
island of sakhalin, hundreds and thousands of victims were pining? what
did this strange criminal law exist for? how had it originated?

from his personal relations with the prisoners, from notes by some of
those in confinement, and by questioning the advocate and the prison
priest, nekhludoff came to the conclusion that the convicts, the
so-called criminals, could be divided into five classes. the first were
quite innocent people, condemned by judicial blunder. such were the
menshoffs, supposed to be incendiaries, maslova, and others. there
were not many of these; according to the priest’s words, only seven per
cent., but their condition excited particular interest.

to the second class belong persons condemned for actions done under
peculiar circumstances, i.e., in a fit of passion, jealousy, or
drunkenness, circumstances under which those who judged them would
surely have committed the same actions.

the third class consisted of people punished for having committed
actions which, according to their understanding, were quite natural,
and even good, but which those other people, the men who made the laws,
considered to be crimes. such were the persons who sold spirits without
a license, smugglers, those who gathered grass and wood on large estates
and in the forests belonging to the crown; the thieving miners; and
those unbelieving people who robbed churches.

to the fourth class belonged those who were imprisoned only because they
stood morally higher than the average level of society. such were the
sectarians, the poles, the circassians rebelling in order to regain
their independence, the political prisoners, the socialists, the
strikers condemned for withstanding the authorities. there was,
according to nekhludoff’s observations, a very large percentage
belonging to this class; among them some of the best of men.

the fifth class consisted of persons who had been far more sinned
against by society than they had sinned against it. these were
castaways, stupefied by continual oppression and temptation, such as the
boy who had stolen the rugs, and hundreds of others whom nekhludoff had
seen in the prison and out of it. the conditions under which they lived
seemed to lead on systematically to those actions which are termed
crimes. a great many thieves and murderers with whom he had lately come
in contact, according to nekhludoff’s estimate, belonged to this class.
to this class nekhludoff also reckoned those depraved, demoralised
creatures whom the new school of criminology classify as the criminal
type, and the existence of which is considered to be the chief proof
of the necessity of criminal law and punishment. this demoralised,
depraved, abnormal type was, according to nekhludoff, exactly the same
as that against whom society had sinned, only here society had sinned
not directly against them, but against their parents and forefathers.

among this latter class nekhludoff was specially struck by one okhotin,
an inveterate thief, the illegitimate son of a prostitute, brought up
in a doss-house, who, up to the age of 30, had apparently never met with
any one whose morality was above that of a policeman, and who had
got into a band of thieves when quite young. he was gifted with an
extraordinary sense of humour, by means of which he made himself very
attractive. he asked nekhludoff for protection, at the same time making
fun of himself, the lawyers, the prison, and laws human and divine.

another was the handsome fedoroff, who, with a band of robbers, of
whom he was the chief, had robbed and murdered an old man, an official.
fedoroff was a peasant, whose father had been unlawfully deprived of his
house, and who, later on, when serving as a soldier, had suffered much
because he had fallen in love with an officer’s mistress. he had a
fascinating, passionate nature, that longed for enjoyment at any cost.
he had never met anybody who restrained himself for any cause whatever,
and had never heard a word about any aim in life other than enjoyment.

nekhludoff distinctly saw that both these men were richly endowed by
nature, but had been neglected and crippled like uncared-for plants.

he had also met a tramp and a woman who had repelled him by their
dulness and seeming cruelty, but even in them he could find no trace of
the criminal type written about by the italian school, but only saw in
them people who were repulsive to him personally, just in the same way
as some he had met outside the prison, in swallow-tail coats wearing
epaulettes, or bedecked with lace. and so the investigation of the
reasons why all these very different persons were put in prison, while
others just like them were going about free and even judging them,
formed a fourth task for nekhludoff.

he hoped to find an answer to this question in books, and bought all
that referred to it. he got the works of lombroso, garofalo, ferry,
list, maudsley, tard, and read them carefully. but as he read he became
more and more disappointed. it happened to him as it always happens
to those who turn to science not in order to play a part in it, nor
to write, nor to dispute, nor to teach, but simply for an answer to an
every-day question of life. science answered thousands of different very
subtle and ingenious questions touching criminal law, but not the one
he was trying to solve. he asked a very simple question: “why, and
with what right, do some people lock up, torment, exile, flog, and kill
others, while they are themselves just like those whom they torment,
flog, and kill?” and in answer he got deliberations as to whether human
beings had free will or not. whether signs of criminality could be
detected by measuring the skulls or not. what part heredity played in
crime. whether immorality could be inherited. what madness is, what
degeneration is, and what temperament is. how climate, food, ignorance,
imitativeness, hypnotism, or passion act. what society is. what are its
duties, etc., etc.

these disquisitions reminded him of the answer he once got from a little
boy whom he met coming home from school. nekhludoff asked him if he had
learned his spelling.

“i have,” answered the boy.

“well, then, tell me, how do you spell ‘leg’?”

“a dog’s leg, or what kind of leg?” the boy answered, with a sly look.

answers in the form of new questions, like the boy’s, was all nekhludoff
got in reply to his one primary question. he found much that was clever,
learned much that was interesting, but what he did not find was an
answer to the principal question: by what right some people punish
others?

not only did he not find any answer, but all the arguments were brought
forward in order to explain and vindicate punishment, the necessity of
which was taken as an axiom.

nekhludoff read much, but only in snatches, and putting down his failure
to this superficial way of reading, hoped to find the answer later on.
he would not allow himself to believe in the truth of the answer which
began, more and more often, to present itself to him.



chapter xxxi.

nekhludoff’s sister and her husband.

the gang of prisoners, with maslova among them, was to start on the 5th
july. nekhludoff arranged to start on the same day.

the day before, nekhludoff’s sister and her husband came to town to see
him.

nekhludoff’s sister, nathalie ivanovna rogozhinsky, was 10 years older
than her brother. she had been very fond of him when he was a boy, and
later on, just before her marriage, they grew very close to each other,
as if they were equals, she being a young woman of 25, he a lad of 15.
at that time she was in love with his friend, nikolenka irtenieff, since
dead. they both loved nikolenka, and loved in him and in themselves that
which is good, and which unites all men. since then they had both been
depraved, he by military service and a vicious life, she by marriage
with a man whom she loved with a sensual love, who did not care for the
things that had once been so dear and holy to her and to her brother,
nor even understand the meaning of those aspirations towards moral
perfection and the service of mankind, which once constituted her life,
and put them down to ambition and the wish to show off; that being the
only explanation comprehensible to him.

nathalie’s husband had been a man without a name and without means, but
cleverly steering towards liberalism or conservatism, according to which
best suited his purpose, he managed to make a comparatively brilliant
judicial career. some peculiarity which made him attractive to women
assisted him when he was no longer in his first youth. while travelling
abroad he made nekhludoff’s acquaintance, and managed to make nathalie,
who was also no longer a girl, fall in love with him, rather against her
mother’s wishes who considered a marriage with him to be a misalliance
for her daughter. nekhludoff, though he tried to hide it from himself,
though he fought against it, hated his brother-in-law.

nekhludoff had a strong antipathy towards him because of the vulgarity
of his feelings, his assurance and narrowness, but chiefly because of
nathalie, who managed to love him in spite of the narrowness of his
nature, and loved him so selfishly, so sensually, and stifled for his
sake all the good that had been in her.

it always hurt nekhludoff to think of nathalie as the wife of that
hairy, self-assured man with the shiny, bald patch on his head. he could
not even master a feeling of revulsion towards their children, and when
he heard that she was again going to have a baby, he felt something like
sorrow that she had once more been infected with something bad by this
man who was so foreign to him. the rogozhinskys had come to moscow
alone, having left their two children--a boy and a girl--at home, and
stopped in the best rooms of the best hotel. nathalie at once went to
her mother’s old house, but hearing from agraphena petrovna that her
brother had left, and was living in a lodging-house, she drove there.
the dirty servant met her in the stuffy passage, dark but for a lamp
which burnt there all day. he told her that the prince was not in.

nathalie asked to be shown into his rooms, as she wished to leave a note
for him, and the man took her up.

nathalie carefully examined her brother’s two little rooms. she noticed
in everything the love of cleanliness and order she knew so well in
him, and was struck by the novel simplicity of the surroundings. on his
writing-table she saw the paper-weight with the bronze dog on the top
which she remembered; the tidy way in which his different portfolios and
writing utensils were placed on the table was also familiar, and so was
the large, crooked ivory paper knife which marked the place in a french
book by tard, which lay with other volumes on punishment and a book
in english by henry george. she sat down at the table and wrote a note
asking him to be sure to come that same day, and shaking her head in
surprise at what she saw, she returned to her hotel.

two questions regarding her brother now interested nathalie: his
marriage with katusha, which she had heard spoken about in their
town--for everybody was speaking about it--and his giving away the land
to the peasants, which was also known, and struck many as something of
a political nature, and dangerous. the marriage with katusha pleased
her in a way. she admired that resoluteness which was so like him and
herself as they used to be in those happy times before her marriage. and
yet she was horrified when she thought her brother was going to marry
such a dreadful woman. the latter was the stronger feeling of the two,
and she decided to use all her influence to prevent him from doing it,
though she knew how difficult this would be.

the other matter, the giving up of the land to the peasants, did not
touch her so nearly, but her husband was very indignant about it, and
expected her to influence her brother against it.

rogozhinsky said that such an action was the height of inconsistency,
flightiness, and pride, the only possible explanation of which was the
desire to appear original, to brag, to make one’s self talked about.

“what sense could there be in letting the land to the peasants, on
condition that they pay the rent to themselves?” he said. “if he was
resolved to do such a thing, why not sell the land to them through the
peasants’ bank? there might have been some sense in that. in fact, this
act verges on insanity.”

and rogozhinsky began seriously thinking about putting nekhludoff under
guardianship, and demanded of his wife that she should speak seriously
to her brother about his curious intention.



chapter xxxii.

nekhludoff’s anarchism.

as soon as nekhludoff returned that evening and saw his sister’s note
on the table he started to go and see her. he found nathalie alone,
her husband having gone to take a rest in the next room. she wore a
tightly-fitting black silk dress, with a red bow in front. her black
hair was crimped and arranged according to the latest fashion.

the pains she took to appear young, for the sake of her husband, whose
equal she was in years, were very obvious.

when she saw her brother she jumped up and hurried towards him, with her
silk dress rustling. they kissed, and looked smilingly at each other.
there passed between them that mysterious exchange of looks, full of
meaning, in which all was true, and which cannot be expressed in words.
then came words which were not true. they had not met since their
mother’s death.

“you have grown stouter and younger,” he said, and her lips puckered up
with pleasure.

“and you have grown thinner.”

“well, and how is your husband?” nekhludoff asked.

“he is taking a rest; he did not sleep all night.” there was much to
say, but it was not said in words; only their looks expressed what their
words failed to say.

“i went to see you.”

“yes, i know. i moved because the house is too big for me. i was lonely
there, and dull. i want nothing of all that is there, so that you had
better take it all--the furniture, i mean, and things.”

“yes, agraphena petrovna told me. i went there. thanks, very much.
but--”

at this moment the hotel waiter brought in a silver tea-set. while he
set the table they were silent. then nathalie sat down at the table and
made the tea, still in silence. nekhludoff also said nothing.

at last nathalie began resolutely. “well, dmitri, i know all about it.”
 and she looked at him.

“what of that? l am glad you know.”

“how can you hope to reform her after the life she has led?” she asked.

he sat quite straight on a small chair, and listened attentively, trying
to understand her and to answer rightly. the state of mind called forth
in him by his last interview with maslova still filled his soul with
quiet joy and good will to all men.

“it is not her but myself i wish to reform,” he replied.

nathalie sighed.

“there are other means besides marriage to do that.”

“but i think it is the best. besides, it leads me into that world in
which i can be of use.”

“i cannot believe you will be happy,” said nathalie.

“it’s not my happiness that is the point.”

“of course, but if she has a heart she cannot be happy--cannot even wish
it.”

“she does not wish it.”

“i understand; but life--”

“yes--life?”

“demands something different.”

“it demands nothing but that we should do what is right,” said
nekhludoff, looking into her face, still handsome, though slightly
wrinkled round eyes and mouth.

“i do not understand,” she said, and sighed.

“poor darling; how could she change so?” he thought, calling back to his
mind nathalie as she had been before her marriage, and feeling towards
her a tenderness woven out of innumerable memories of childhood. at that
moment rogozhinsky entered the room, with head thrown back and expanded
chest, and stepping lightly and softly in his usual manner, his
spectacles, his bald patch, and his black beard all glistening.

“how do you do? how do you do?” he said, laying an unnatural and
intentional stress on his words. (though, soon after the marriage,
they had tried to be more familiar with each other, they had never
succeeded.)

they shook hands, and rogozhinsky sank softly into an easy-chair.

“am i not interrupting your conversation?”

“no, i do not wish to hide what i am saying or doing from any one.”

as soon as nekhludoff saw the hairy hands, and heard the patronising,
self-assured tones, his meekness left him in a moment.

“yes, we were talking about his intentions,” said nathalie. “shall i
give you a cup of tea?” she added, taking the teapot.

“yes, please. what particular intentions do you mean?”

“that of going to siberia with the gang of prisoners, among whom is the
woman i consider myself to have wronged,” uttered nekhludoff.

“i hear not only to accompany her, but more than that.”

“yes, and to marry her if she wishes it.”

“dear me! but if you do not object i should like to ask you to explain
your motives. i do not understand them.”

“my motives are that this woman--that this woman’s first step on her way
to degradation--” nekhludoff got angry with himself, and was unable to
find the right expression. “my motives are that i am the guilty one, and
she gets the punishment.”

“if she is being punished she cannot be innocent, either.”

“she is quite innocent.” and nekhludoff related the whole incident with
unnecessary warmth.

“yes, that was a case of carelessness on the part of the president, the
result of which was a thoughtless answer on the part of the jury; but
there is the senate for cases like that.”

“the senate has rejected the appeal.”

“well, if the senate has rejected it, there cannot have been sufficient
reasons for an appeal,” said rogozhinsky, evidently sharing the
prevailing opinion that truth is the product of judicial decrees. “the
senate cannot enter into the question on its merits. if there is a real
mistake, the emperor should be petitioned.”

“that has been done, but there is no probability of success. they will
apply to the department of the ministry, the department will consult the
senate, the senate will repeat its decision, and, as usual, the innocent
will get punished.”

“in the first place, the department of the ministry won’t consult the
senate,” said rogozhinsky, with a condescending smile; “it will give
orders for the original deeds to be sent from the law court, and if
it discovers a mistake it will decide accordingly. and, secondly, the
innocent are never punished, or at least in very rare, exceptional
cases. it is the guilty who are punished,” rogozhinsky said
deliberately, and smiled self-complacently.

“and i have become fully convinced that most of those condemned by law
are innocent.”

“how’s that?”

“innocent in the literal sense. just as this woman is innocent of
poisoning any one; as innocent as a peasant i have just come to know, of
the murder he never committed; as a mother and son who were on the point
of being condemned for incendiarism, which was committed by the owner of
the house that was set on fire.”

“well, of course there always have been and always will be judicial
errors. human institutions cannot be perfect.”

“and, besides, there are a great many people convicted who are innocent
of doing anything considered wrong by the society they have grown up
in.”

“excuse me, this is not so; every thief knows that stealing is wrong,
and that we should not steal; that it is immoral,” said rogozhinsky,
with his quiet, self-assured, slightly contemptuous smile, which
specially irritated nekhludoff.

“no, he does not know it; they say to him ‘don’t steal,’ and he knows
that the master of the factory steals his labour by keeping back his
wages; that the government, with its officials, robs him continually by
taxation.”

“why, this is anarchism,” rogozhinsky said, quietly defining his
brother-in-law’s words.

“i don’t know what it is; i am only telling you the truth,” nekhludoff
continued. “he knows that the government is robbing him, knows that we
landed proprietors have robbed him long since, robbed him of the land
which should be the common property of all, and then, if he picks up dry
wood to light his fire on that land stolen from him, we put him in jail,
and try to persuade him that he is a thief. of course he knows that not
he but those who robbed him of the land are thieves, and that to get any
restitution of what has been robbed is his duty towards his family.”

“i don’t understand, or if i do i cannot agree with it. the land must
be somebody’s property,” began rogozhinsky quietly, and, convinced that
nekhludoff was a socialist, and that socialism demands that all the land
should be divided equally, that such a division would be very foolish,
and that he could easily prove it to be so, he said. “if you divided
it equally to-day, it would to-morrow be again in the hands of the most
industrious and clever.”

“nobody is thinking of dividing the land equally. the land must not
be anybody’s property; must not be a thing to be bought and sold or
rented.”

“the rights of property are inborn in man; without them the cultivation
of land would present no interest. destroy the rights of property and
we lapse into barbarism.” rogozhinsky uttered this authoritatively,
repeating the usual argument in favour of private ownership of land
which is supposed to be irrefutable, based on the assumption that
people’s desire to possess land proves that they need it.

“on the contrary, only when the land is nobody’s property will it cease
to lie idle, as it does now, while the landlords, like dogs in the
manger, unable themselves to put it to use, will not let those use it
who are able.”

“but, dmitri ivanovitch, what you are saying is sheer madness. is it
possible to abolish property in land in our age? i know it is your old
hobby. but allow me to tell you straight,” and rogozhinsky grew pale,
and his voice trembled. it was evident that this question touched him
very nearly. “i should advise you to consider this question well before
attempting to solve it practically.”

“are you speaking of my personal affairs?”

“yes, i hold that we who are placed in special circumstances should
bear the responsibilities which spring from those circumstances, should
uphold the conditions in which we were born, and which we have
inherited from our predecessors, and which we ought to pass on to our
descendants.”

“i consider it my duty--”

“wait a bit,” said rogozhinsky, not permitting the interruption. “i am
not speaking for myself or my children. the position of my children is
assured, and i earn enough for us to live comfortably, and i expect my
children will live so too, so that my interest in your action--which,
if you will allow me to say so, is not well considered--is not based
on personal motives; it is on principle that i cannot agree with you. i
should advise you to think it well over, to read---?”

“please allow me to settle my affairs, and to choose what to read and
what not to read, myself,” said nekhludoff, turning pale. feeling
his hands grow cold, and that he was no longer master of himself, he
stopped, and began drinking his tea.



chapter xxxiii.

the aim of the law.

“well, and how are the children?” nekhludoff asked his sister when he
was calmer. the sister told him about the children. she said they were
staying with their grandmother (their father’s mother), and, pleased
that his dispute with her husband had come to an end, she began telling
him how her children played that they were travelling, just as he used
to do with his three dolls, one of them a negro and another which he
called the french lady.

“can you really remember it all?” said nekhludoff, smiling.

“yes, and just fancy, they play in the very same way.”

the unpleasant conversation had been brought to an end, and nathalie was
quieter, but she did not care to talk in her husband’s presence of what
could be comprehensible only to her brother, so, wishing to start a
general conversation, she began talking about the sorrow of kamenski’s
mother at losing her only son, who had fallen in a duel, for this
petersburg topic of the day had now reached moscow. rogozhinsky
expressed disapproval at the state of things that excluded murder in a
duel from the ordinary criminal offences. this remark evoked a rejoinder
from nekhludoff, and a new dispute arose on the subject. nothing was
fully explained, neither of the antagonists expressed all he had in
his mind, each keeping to his conviction, which condemned the other.
rogozhinsky felt that nekhludoff condemned him and despised his
activity, and he wished to show him the injustice of his opinions.

nekhludoff, on the other hand, felt provoked by his brother-in-law’s
interference in his affairs concerning the land. and knowing in his
heart of hearts that his sister, her husband, and their children, as his
heirs, had a right to do so, was indignant that this narrow-minded
man persisted with calm assurance to regard as just and lawful what
nekhludoff no longer doubted was folly and crime.

this man’s arrogance annoyed nekhludoff.

“what could the law do?” he asked.

“it could sentence one of the two duellists to the mines like an
ordinary murderer.”

nekhludoff’s hands grew cold.

“well, and what good would that be?” he asked, hotly.

“it would be just.”

“as if justice were the aim of the law,” said nekhludoff.

“what else?”

“the upholding of class interests! i think the law is only an instrument
for upholding the existing order of things beneficial to our class.”

“this is a perfectly new view,” said rogozhinsky with a quiet smile;
“the law is generally supposed to have a totally different aim.”

“yes, so it has in theory but not in practice, as i have found out. the
law aims only at preserving the present state of things, and therefore
it persecutes and executes those who stand above the ordinary level and
wish to raise it--the so-called political prisoners, as well as those
who are below the average--the so-called criminal types.”

“i do not agree with you. in the first place, i cannot admit that the
criminals classed as political are punished because they are above the
average. in most cases they are the refuse of society, just as much
perverted, though in a different way, as the criminal types whom you
consider below the average.”

“but i happen to know men who are morally far above their judges; all
the sectarians are moral, from--”

but rogozhinsky, a man not accustomed to be interrupted when he spoke,
did not listen to nekhludoff, but went on talking at the same time,
thereby irritating him still more.

“nor can i admit that the object of the law is the upholding of the
present state of things. the law aims at reforming--”

“a nice kind of reform, in a prison!” nekhludoff put in.

“or removing,” rogozhinsky went on, persistently, “the perverted and
brutalised persons that threaten society.”

“that’s just what it doesn’t do. society has not the means of doing
either the one thing or the other.”

“how is that? i don’t understand,” said rogozhinsky with a forced smile.

“i mean that only two reasonable kinds of punishment exist. those used
in the old days: corporal and capital punishment, which, as human nature
gradually softens, come more and more into disuse,” said nekhludoff.

“there, now, this is quite new and very strange to hear from your lips.”

“yes, it is reasonable to hurt a man so that he should not do in future
what he is hurt for doing, and it is also quite reasonable to cut a
man’s head off when he is injurious or dangerous to society. these
punishments have a reasonable meaning. but what sense is there in
locking up in a prison a man perverted by want of occupation and bad
example; to place him in a position where he is provided for, where
laziness is imposed on him, and where he is in company with the most
perverted of men? what reason is there to take a man at public cost (it
comes to more than 500 roubles per head) from the toula to the irkoatsk
government, or from koursk--”

“yes, but all the same, people are afraid of those journeys at public
cost, and if it were not for such journeys and the prisons, you and i
would not be sitting here as we are.”

“the prisons cannot insure our safety, because these people do not
stay there for ever, but are set free again. on the contrary, in those
establishments men are brought to the greatest vice and degradation, so
that the danger is increased.”

“you mean to say that the penitentiary system should be improved.”

“it cannot be improved. improved prisons would cost more than all that
is being now spent on the people’s education, and would lay a still
heavier burden on the people.”

“the shortcomings of the penitentiary system in nowise invalidate
the law itself,” rogozhinsky continued again, without heeding his
brother-in-law.

“there is no remedy for these shortcomings,” said nekhludoff, raising
his voice.

“what of that? shall we therefore go and kill, or, as a certain
statesman proposed, go putting out people’s eyes?” rogozhinsky remarked.

“yes; that would be cruel, but it would be effective. what is done
now is cruel, and not only ineffective, but so stupid that one cannot
understand how people in their senses can take part in so absurd and
cruel a business as criminal law.”

“but i happen to take part in it,” said rogozhinsky, growing pale.

“that is your business. but to me it is incomprehensible.”

“i think there are a good many things incomprehensible to you,” said
rogozhinsky, with a trembling voice.

“i have seen how one public prosecutor did his very best to get an
unfortunate boy condemned, who could have evoked nothing but sympathy in
an unperverted mind. i know how another cross-examined a sectarian and
put down the reading of the gospels as a criminal offence; in fact, the
whole business of the law courts consists in senseless and cruel actions
of that sort.”

“i should not serve if i thought so,” said rogozhinsky, rising.

nekhludoff noticed a peculiar glitter under his brother-in-law’s
spectacles. “can it be tears?” he thought. and they were really tears
of injured pride. rogozhinsky went up to the window, got out his
handkerchief, coughed and rubbed his spectacles, took them off, and
wiped his eyes.

when he returned to the sofa he lit a cigar, and did not speak any more.

nekhludoff felt pained and ashamed of having offended his brother-in-law
and his sister to such a degree, especially as he was going away the
next day.

he parted with them in confusion, and drove home.

“all i have said may be true--anyhow he did not reply. but it was not
said in the right way. how little i must have changed if i could be
carried away by ill-feeling to such an extent as to hurt and wound poor
nathalie in such a way!” he thought.



chapter xxxiv.

the prisoners start for siberia.

the gang of prisoners, among whom was maslova, was to leave moscow by
rail at 3 p.m.; therefore, in order to see the gang start, and walk
to the station with the prisoners nekhludoff meant to reach the prison
before 12 o’clock.

the night before, as he was packing up and sorting his papers, he came
upon his diary, and read some bits here and there. the last bit written
before he left for petersburg ran thus: “katusha does not wish to accept
my sacrifice; she wishes to make a sacrifice herself. she has conquered,
and so have i. she makes me happy by the inner change, which seems
to me, though i fear to believe it, to be going on in her. i fear to
believe it, yet she seems to be coming back to life.” then further on
he read. “i have lived through something very hard and very joyful. i
learnt that she has behaved very badly in the hospital, and i suddenly
felt great pain. i never expected that it could be so painful. i spoke
to her with loathing and hatred, then all of a sudden i called to mind
how many times i have been, and even still am, though but in thought,
guilty of the thing that i hated her for, and immediately i became
disgusting to myself, and pitied her and felt happy again. if only we
could manage to see the beam in our own eye in time, how kind we
should be.” then he wrote: “i have been to see nathalie, and again
self-satisfaction made me unkind and spiteful, and a heavy feeling
remains. well, what is to be done? tomorrow a new life will begin. a
final good-bye to the old! many new impressions have accumulated, but i
cannot yet bring them to unity.”

when he awoke the next morning nekhludoff’s first feeling was regret
about the affair between him and his brother-in-law.

“i cannot go away like this,” he thought. “i must go and make it up with
them.” but when he looked at his watch he saw that he had not time to
go, but must hurry so as not to be too late for the departure of the
gang. he hastily got everything ready, and sent the things to the
station with a servant and taras, theodosia’s husband, who was going
with them. then he took the first isvostchik he could find and drove off
to the prison.

the prisoners’ train started two hours before the train by which he was
going, so nekhludoff paid his bill in the lodgings and left for good.

it was july, and the weather was unbearably hot. from the stones, the
walls, the iron of the roofs, which the sultry night had not cooled, the
heat streamed into the motionless air. when at rare intervals a slight
breeze did arise, it brought but a whiff of hot air filled with dust and
smelling of oil paint.

there were few people in the streets, and those who were out tried to
keep on the shady side. only the sunburnt peasants, with their bronzed
faces and bark shoes on their feet, who were mending the road, sat
hammering the stones into the burning sand in the sun; while the
policemen, in their holland blouses, with revolvers fastened with
orange cords, stood melancholy and depressed in the middle of the road,
changing from foot to foot; and the tramcars, the horses of which wore
holland hoods on their heads, with slits for the ears, kept passing up
and down the sunny road with ringing bells.

when nekhludoff drove up to the prison the gang had not left the yard.
the work of delivering and receiving the prisoners that had commenced
at 4 a.m. was still going on. the gang was to consist of 623 men and 64
women; they had all to be received according to the registry lists.
the sick and the weak to be sorted out, and all to be delivered to the
convoy. the new inspector, with two assistants, the doctor and medical
assistant, the officer of the convoy, and the clerk, were sitting in the
prison yard at a table covered with writing materials and papers, which
was placed in the shade of a wall. they called the prisoners one by one,
examined and questioned them, and took notes. the rays of the sun had
gradually reached the table, and it was growing very hot and oppressive
for want of air and because of the breathing crowd of prisoners that
stood close by.

“good gracious, will this never come to an end!” the convoy officer,
a tall, fat, red-faced man with high shoulders, who kept puffing the
smoke, of his cigarette into his thick moustache, asked, as he drew in
a long puff. “you are killing me. from where have you got them all? are
there many more?” the clerk inquired.

“twenty-four men and the women.”

“what are you standing there for? come on,” shouted the convoy officer
to the prisoners who had not yet passed the revision, and who stood
crowded one behind the other. the prisoners had been standing there more
than three hours, packed in rows in the full sunlight, waiting their
turns.

while this was going on in the prison yard, outside the gate, besides
the sentinel who stood there as usual with a gun, were drawn up about 20
carts, to carry the luggage of the prisoners and such prisoners as were
too weak to walk, and a group of relatives and friends waiting to see
the prisoners as they came out and to exchange a few words if a chance
presented itself and to give them a few things. nekhludoff took his
place among the group. he had stood there about an hour when the
clanking of chains, the noise of footsteps, authoritative voices, the
sound of coughing, and the low murmur of a large crowd became audible.

this continued for about five minutes, during which several jailers went
in and out of the gateway. at last the word of command was given. the
gate opened with a thundering noise, the clattering of the chains became
louder, and the convoy soldiers, dressed in white blouses and carrying
guns, came out into the street and took their places in a large, exact
circle in front of the gate; this was evidently a usual, often-practised
manoeuvre. then another command was given, and the prisoners began
coming out in couples, with flat, pancake-shaped caps on their shaved
heads and sacks over their shoulders, dragging their chained legs and
swinging one arm, while the other held up a sack.

first came the men condemned to hard labour, all dressed alike in grey
trousers and cloaks with marks on the back. all of them--young and old,
thin and fat, pale and red, dark and bearded and beardless, russians,
tartars, and jews--came out, clattering with their chains and briskly
swinging their arms as if prepared to go a long distance, but stopped
after having taken ten steps, and obediently took their places behind
each other, four abreast. then without interval streamed out more shaved
men, dressed in the same manner but with chains only on their legs.
these were condemned to exile. they came out as briskly and stopped as
suddenly, taking their places four in a row. then came those exiled by
their communes. then the women in the same order, first those condemned
to hard labour, with grey cloaks and kerchiefs; then the exiled women,
and those following their husbands of their own free will, dressed in
their own town or village clothing. some of the women were carrying
babies wrapped in the fronts of their grey cloaks.

with the women came the children, boys and girls, who, like colts in a
herd of horses, pressed in among the prisoners.

the men took their places silently, only coughing now and then, or
making short remarks.

the women talked without intermission. nekhludoff thought he saw maslova
as they were coming out, but she was at once lost in the large crowd,
and he could only see grey creatures, seemingly devoid of all that was
human, or at any rate of all that was womanly, with sacks on their backs
and children round them, taking their places behind the men.

though all the prisoners had been counted inside the prison walls, the
convoy counted them again, comparing the numbers with the list. this
took very long, especially as some of the prisoners moved and changed
places, which confused the convoy.

the convoy soldiers shouted and pushed the prisoners (who complied
obediently, but angrily) and counted them over again. when all had
been counted, the convoy officer gave a command, and the crowd became
agitated. the weak men and women and children rushed, racing each
other, towards the carts, and began placing their bags on the carts
and climbing up themselves. women with crying babies, merry children
quarrelling for places, and dull, careworn prisoners got into the carts.

several of the prisoners took off their caps and came up to the convoy
officer with some request. nekhludoff found out later that they were
asking for places on the carts. nekhludoff saw how the officer, without
looking at the prisoners, drew in a whiff from his cigarette, and then
suddenly waved his short arm in front of one of the prisoners, who
quickly drew his shaved head back between his shoulders as if afraid of
a blow, and sprang back.

“i will give you a lift such that you’ll remember. you’ll get there on
foot right enough,” shouted the officer. only one of the men was granted
his request--an old man with chains on his legs; and nekhludoff saw the
old man take off his pancake-shaped cap, and go up to the cart crossing
himself. he could not manage to get up on the cart because of the chains
that prevented his lifting his old legs, and a woman who was sitting in
the cart at last pulled him in by the arm.

when all the sacks were in the carts, and those who were allowed to get
in were seated, the officer took off his cap, wiped his forehead, his
bald head and fat, red neck, and crossed himself.

“march,” commanded the officer. the soldiers’ guns gave a click; the
prisoners took off their caps and crossed themselves, those who were
seeing them off shouted something, the prisoners shouted in answer, a
row arose among the women, and the gang, surrounded by the soldiers in
their white blouses, moved forward, raising the dust with their chained
feet. the soldiers went in front; then came the convicts condemned to
hard labour, clattering with their chains; then the exiled and those
exiled by the communes, chained in couples by their wrists; then the
women. after them, on the carts loaded with sacks, came the weak. high
up on one of the carts sat a woman closely wrapped up, and she kept
shrieking and sobbing.



chapter xxxv.

not men but strange and terrible creatures?

the procession was such a long one that the carts with the luggage and
the weak started only when those in front were already out of sight.
when the last of the carts moved, nekhludoff got into the trap that
stood waiting for him and told the isvostchik to catch up the prisoners
in front, so that he could see if he knew any of the men in the gang,
and then try and find out maslova among the women and ask her if she had
received the things he sent.

it was very hot, and a cloud of dust that was raised by a thousand
tramping feet stood all the time over the gang that was moving down
the middle of the street. the prisoners were walking quickly, and the
slow-going isvostchik’s horse was some time in catching them up. row
upon row they passed, those strange and terrible-looking creatures, none
of whom nekhludoff knew.

on they went, all dressed alike, moving a thousand feet all shod alike,
swinging their free arms as if to keep up their spirits. there were so
many of them, they all looked so much alike, and they were all placed in
such unusual, peculiar circumstances, that they seemed to nekhludoff
to be not men but some sort of strange and terrible creatures. this
impression passed when he recognised in the crowd of convicts the
murderer federoff, and among the exiles okhotin the wit, and another
tramp who had appealed to him for assistance. almost all the prisoners
turned and looked at the trap that was passing them and at the gentleman
inside. federoff tossed his head backwards as a sign that he had
recognised nekhludoff, okhotin winked, but neither of them bowed,
considering it not the thing.

as soon as nekhludoff came up to the women he saw maslova; she was in
the second row. the first in the row was a short-legged, black-eyed,
hideous woman, who had her cloak tucked up in her girdle. this was
koroshavka. the next was a pregnant woman, who dragged herself along
with difficulty. the third was maslova; she was carrying her sack on
her shoulder, and looking straight before her. her face looked calm
and determined. the fourth in the row was a young, lovely woman who was
walking along briskly, dressed in a short cloak, her kerchief tied in
peasant fashion. this was theodosia.

nekhludoff got down and approached the women, meaning to ask maslova if
she had got the things he had sent her, and how she was feeling, but the
convoy sergeant, who was walking on that side, noticed him at once, and
ran towards him.

“you must not do that, sir. it is against the regulations to approach
the gang,” shouted the sergeant as he came up.

but when he recognised nekhludoff (every one in the prison knew
nekhludoff) the sergeant raised his fingers to his cap, and, stopping
in front of nekhludoff, said: “not now; wait till we get to the railway
station; here it is not allowed. don’t lag behind; march!” he shouted to
the convicts, and putting on a brisk air, he ran back to his place at a
trot, in spite of the heat and the elegant new boots on his feet.

nekhludoff went on to the pavement and told the isvostchik to follow
him; himself walking, so as to keep the convicts in sight. wherever the
gang passed it attracted attention mixed with horror and compassion.
those who drove past leaned out of the vehicles and followed the
prisoners with their eyes. those on foot stopped and looked with fear
and surprise at the terrible sight. some came up and gave alms to the
prisoners. the alms were received by the convoy. some, as if they were
hypnotised, followed the gang, but then stopped, shook their heads, and
followed the prisoners only with their eyes. everywhere the people
came out of the gates and doors, and called others to come out, too,
or leaned out of the windows looking, silent and immovable, at the
frightful procession. at a cross-road a fine carriage was stopped by the
gang. a fat coachman, with a shiny face and two rows of buttons on his
back, sat on the box; a married couple sat facing the horses, the wife,
a pale, thin woman, with a light-coloured bonnet on her head and a
bright sunshade in her hand, the husband with a top-hat and a well-cut
light-coloured overcoat. on the seat in front sat their children--a
well-dressed little girl, with loose, fair hair, and as fresh as a
flower, who also held a bright parasol, and an eight-year-old boy, with
a long, thin neck and sharp collarbones, a sailor hat with long ribbons
on his head.

the father was angrily scolding the coachman because he had not passed
in front of the gang when he had a chance, and the mother frowned and
half closed her eyes with a look of disgust, shielding herself from the
dust and the sun with her silk sunshade, which she held close to her
face.

the fat coachman frowned angrily at the unjust rebukes of his
master--who had himself given the order to drive along that street--and
with difficulty held in the glossy, black horses, foaming under their
harness and impatient to go on.

the policeman wished with all his soul to please the owner of the fine
equipage by stopping the gang, yet felt that the dismal solemnity of
the procession could not be broken even for so rich a gentleman. he only
raised his fingers to his cap to show his respect for riches, and looked
severely at the prisoners as if promising in any case to protect the
owners of the carriage from them. so the carriage had to wait till the
whole of the procession had passed, and could only move on when the last
of the carts, laden with sacks and prisoners, rattled by. the hysterical
woman who sat on one of the carts, and had grown calm, again began
shrieking and sobbing when she saw the elegant carriage. then the
coachman tightened the reins with a slight touch, and the black
trotters, their shoes ringing against the paving stones, drew the
carriage, softly swaying on its rubber tires, towards the country
house where the husband, the wife, the girl, and the boy with the sharp
collar-bones were going to amuse themselves. neither the father nor the
mother gave the girl and boy any explanation of what they had seen, so
that the children had themselves to find out the meaning of this curious
sight. the girl, taking the expression of her father’s and mother’s
faces into consideration, solved the problem by assuming that these
people were quite another kind of men and women than her father and
mother and their acquaintances, that they were bad people, and that they
had therefore to be treated in the manner they were being treated.

therefore the girl felt nothing but fear, and was glad when she could no
longer see those people.

but the boy with the long, thin neck, who looked at the procession
of prisoners without taking his eyes off them, solved the question
differently.

he still knew, firmly and without any doubt, for he had it from god,
that these people were just the same kind of people as he was, and like
all other people, and therefore some one had done these people some
wrong, something that ought not to have been done, and he was sorry for
them, and felt no horror either of those who were shaved and chained or
of those who had shaved and chained them. and so the boy’s lips pouted
more and more, and he made greater and greater efforts not to cry,
thinking it a shame to cry in such a case.



chapter xxxvi.

the tender mercies of the lord.

nekhludoff kept up with the quick pace of the convicts. though lightly
clothed he felt dreadfully hot, and it was hard to breathe in the
stifling, motionless, burning air filled with dust.

when he had walked about a quarter of a mile he again got into the trap,
but it felt still hotter in the middle of the street. he tried to recall
last night’s conversation with his brother-in-law, but the recollections
no longer excited him as they had done in the morning. they were dulled
by the impressions made by the starting and procession of the gang, and
chiefly by the intolerable heat.

on the pavement, in the shade of some trees overhanging a fence, he saw
two schoolboys standing over a kneeling man who sold ices. one of the
boys was already sucking a pink spoon and enjoying his ices, the other
was waiting for a glass that was being filled with something yellowish.

“where could i get a drink?” nekhludoff asked his isvostchik, feeling an
insurmountable desire for some refreshment.

“there is a good eating-house close by,” the isvostchik answered, and
turning a corner, drove up to a door with a large signboard. the plump
clerk in a russian shirt, who stood behind the counter, and the waiters
in their once white clothing who sat at the tables (there being hardly
any customers) looked with curiosity at the unusual visitor and offered
him their services. nekhludoff asked for a bottle of seltzer water and
sat down some way from the window at a small table covered with a dirty
cloth. two men sat at another table with tea-things and a white bottle
in front of them, mopping their foreheads, and calculating something in
a friendly manner. one of them was dark and bald, and had just such a
border of hair at the back as rogozhinsky. this sight again reminded
nekhludoff of yesterday’s talk with his brother-in-law and his wish to
see him and nathalie.

“i shall hardly be able to do it before the train starts,” he thought;
“i’d better write.” he asked for paper, an envelope, and a stamp, and as
he was sipping the cool, effervescent water he considered what he should
say. but his thoughts wandered, and he could not manage to compose a
letter.

“my dear nathalie,--i cannot go away with the heavy impression that
yesterday’s talk with your husband has left,” he began. “what next?
shall i ask him to forgive me what i said yesterday? but i only said
what i felt, and he will think that i am taking it back. besides, this
interference of his in my private matters. . . . no, i cannot,” and
again he felt hatred rising in his heart towards that man so foreign
to him. he folded the unfinished letter and put it in his pocket, paid,
went out, and again got into the trap to catch up the gang. it had grown
still hotter. the stones and the walls seemed to be breathing out hot
air. the pavement seemed to scorch the feet, and nekhludoff felt a
burning sensation in his hand when he touched the lacquered splashguard
of his trap.

the horse was jogging along at a weary trot, beating the uneven, dusty
road monotonously with its hoofs, the isvostchik kept falling into a
doze, nekhludoff sat without thinking of anything.

at the bottom of a street, in front of a large house, a group of people
had collected, and a convoy soldier stood by.

“what has happened?” nekhludoff asked of a porter.

“something the matter with a convict.”

nekhludoff got down and came up to the group. on the rough stones,
where the pavement slanted down to the gutter, lay a broadly-built,
red-bearded, elderly convict, with his head lower than his feet, and
very red in the face. he had a grey cloak and grey trousers on, and lay
on his back with the palms of his freckled hands downwards, and at
long intervals his broad, high chest heaved, and he groaned, while
his bloodshot eyes were fixed on the sky. by him stood a cross-looking
policeman, a pedlar, a postman, a clerk, an old woman with a parasol,
and a short-haired boy with an empty basket.

“they are weak. having been locked up in prison they’ve got weak, and
then they lead them through the most broiling heat,” said the clerk,
addressing nekhludoff, who had just come up.

“he’ll die, most likely,” said the woman with the parasol, in a doleful
tone.

“his shirt should be untied,” said the postman.

the policeman began, with his thick, trembling fingers, clumsily to
untie the tapes that fastened the shirt round the red, sinewy neck. he
was evidently excited and confused, but still thought it necessary to
address the crowd.

“what have you collected here for? it is hot enough without your keeping
the wind off.”

“they should have been examined by a doctor, and the weak ones left
behind,” said the clerk, showing off his knowledge of the law.

the policeman, having undone the tapes of the shirt, rose and looked
round.

“move on, i tell you. it is not your business, is it? what’s there
to stare at?” he said, and turned to nekhludoff for sympathy, but not
finding any in his face he turned to the convoy soldier.

but the soldier stood aside, examining the trodden-down heel of his
boot, and was quite indifferent to the policeman’s perplexity.

“those whose business it is don’t care. is it right to do men to death
like this? a convict is a convict, but still he is a man,” different
voices were heard saying in the crowd.

“put his head up higher, and give him some water,” said nekhludoff.

“water has been sent for,” said the policeman, and taking the prisoner
under the arms he with difficulty pulled his body a little higher up.

“what’s this gathering here?” said a decided, authoritative voice, and
a police officer, with a wonderfully clean, shiny blouse, and still more
shiny top-boots, came up to the assembled crowd.

“move on. no standing about here,” he shouted to the crowd, before he
knew what had attracted it.

when he came near and saw the dying convict, he made a sign of approval
with his head, just as if he had quite expected it, and, turning to the
policeman, said, “how is this?”

the policeman said that, as a gang of prisoners was passing, one of the
convicts had fallen down, and the convoy officer had ordered him to be
left behind.

“well, that’s all right. he must be taken to the police station. call an
isvostchik.”

“a porter has gone for one,” said the policeman, with his fingers raised
to his cap.

the shopman began something about the heat.

“is it your business, eh? move on,” said the police officer, and looked
so severely at him that the clerk was silenced.

“he ought to have a little water,” said nekhludoff. the police officer
looked severely at nekhludoff also, but said nothing. when the porter
brought a mug full of water, he told the policeman to offer some to the
convict. the policeman raised the drooping head, and tried to pour a
little water down the mouth; but the prisoner could not swallow it, and
it ran down his beard, wetting his jacket and his coarse, dirty linen
shirt.

“pour it on his head,” ordered the officer; and the policeman took off
the pancake-shaped cap and poured the water over the red curls and bald
part of the prisoner’s head. his eyes opened wide as if in fear, but his
position remained unchanged.

streams of dirt trickled down his dusty face, but the mouth continued to
gasp in the same regular way, and his whole body shook.

“and what’s this? take this one,” said the police officer, pointing to
nekhludoff’s isvostchik. “you, there, drive up.”

“i am engaged,” said the isvostchik, dismally, and without looking up.

“it is my isvostchik; but take him. i will pay you,” said nekhludoff,
turning to the isvostchik.

“well, what are you waiting for?” shouted the officer. “catch hold.”

the policeman, the porter, and the convoy soldier lifted the dying man
and carried him to the trap, and put him on the seat. but he could not
sit up; his head fell back, and the whole of his body glided off the
seat.

“make him lie down,” ordered the officer.

“it’s all right, your honour; i’ll manage him like this,” said the
policeman, sitting down by the dying man, and clasping his strong,
right arm round the body under the arms. the convoy soldier lifted the
stockingless feet, in prison shoes, and put them into the trap.

the police officer looked around, and noticing the pancake-shaped hat of
the convict lifted it up and put it on the wet, drooping head.

“go on,” he ordered.

the isvostchik looked angrily round, shook his head, and, accompanied
by the convoy soldier, drove back to the police station. the policeman,
sitting beside the convict, kept dragging up the body that was
continually sliding down from the seat, while the head swung from side
to side.

the convoy soldier, who was walking by the side of the trap, kept
putting the legs in their place. nekhludoff followed the trap.



chapter xxxvii.

spilled like water on the ground.

the trap passed the fireman who stood sentinel at the entrance, [the
headquarters of the fire brigade and the police stations are generally
together in moscow] drove into the yard of the police station, and
stopped at one of the doors. in the yard several firemen with their
sleeves tucked up were washing some kind of cart and talking loudly.
when the trap stopped, several policemen surrounded it, and taking the
lifeless body of the convict under the arms, took him out of the trap,
which creaked under him. the policeman who had brought the body got
down, shook his numbed arm, took off his cap, and crossed himself.
the body was carried through the door and up the stairs. nekhludoff
followed. in the small, dirty room where the body was taken there stood
four beds. on two of them sat a couple of sick men in dressing-gowns,
one with a crooked mouth, whose neck was bandaged, the other one in
consumption. two of the beds were empty; the convict was laid on one of
them. a little man, with glistening eyes and continually moving brows,
with only his underclothes and stockings on, came up with quick, soft
steps, looked at the convict and then at nekhludoff, and burst into loud
laughter. this was a madman who was being kept in the police hospital.

“they wish to frighten me, but no, they won’t succeed,” he said.

the policemen who carried the corpse were followed by a police officer
and a medical assistant. the medical assistant came up to the body and
touched the freckled hand, already growing cold, which, though still
soft, was deadly pale. he held it for a moment, and then let it go. it
fell lifelessly on the stomach of the dead man.

“he’s ready,” said the medical assistant, but, evidently to be quite in
order, he undid the wet, brown shirt, and tossing back the curls from
his ear, put it to the yellowish, broad, immovable chest of the convict.
all were silent. the medical assistant raised himself again, shook his
head, and touched with his fingers first one and then the other lid over
the open, fixed blue eyes.

“i’m not frightened, i’m not frightened.” the madman kept repeating
these words, and spitting in the direction of the medical assistant.

“well?” asked the police officer.

“well! he must be put into the mortuary.”

“are you sure? mind,” said the police officer.

“it’s time i should know,” said the medical assistant, drawing the shirt
over the body’s chest. “however, i will send for mathew ivanovitch. let
him have a look. petrov, call him,” and the medical assistant stepped
away from the body.

“take him to the mortuary,” said the police officer. “and then you must
come into the office and sign,” he added to the convoy soldier, who had
not left the convict for a moment.

“yes, sir,” said the soldier.

the policemen lifted the body and carried it down again. nekhludoff
wished to follow, but the madman kept him back.

“you are not in the plot! well, then, give me a cigarette,” he said.
nekhludoff got out his cigarette case and gave him one.

the madman, quickly moving his brows all the time, began relating how
they tormented him by thought suggestion.

“why, they are all against me, and torment and torture me through their
mediums.”

“i beg your pardon,” said nekhludoff, and without listening any further
he left the room and went out into the yard, wishing to know where the
body would be put.

the policemen with their burden had already crossed the yard, and were
coming to the door of a cellar. nekhludoff wished to go up to them, but
the police officer stopped him.

“what do you want?”

“nothing.”

“nothing? then go away.”

nekhludoff obeyed, and went back to his isvostchik, who was dozing. he
awoke him, and they drove back towards the railway station.

they had not made a hundred steps when they met a cart accompanied by
a convoy soldier with a gun. on the cart lay another convict, who was
already dead. the convict lay on his back in the cart, his shaved head,
from which the pancake-shaped cap had slid over the black-bearded face
down to the nose, shaking and thumping at every jolt. the driver, in
his heavy boots, walked by the side of the cart, holding the reins;
a policeman followed on foot. nekhludoff touched his isvostchik’s
shoulder.

“just look what they are doing,” said the isvostchik, stopping his
horse.

nekhludoff got down and, following the cart, again passed the sentinel
and entered the gate of the police station. by this time the firemen had
finished washing the cart, and a tall, bony man, the chief of the fire
brigade, with a coloured band round his cap, stood in their place, and,
with his hands in his pockets, was severely looking at a fat-necked,
well-fed, bay stallion that was being led up and down before him by a
fireman. the stallion was lame on one of his fore feet, and the chief of
the firemen was angrily saying something to a veterinary who stood by.

the police officer was also present. when he saw the cart he went up to
the convoy soldier.

“where did you bring him from?” he asked, shaking his head
disapprovingly.

“from the gorbatovskaya,” answered the policeman.

“a prisoner?” asked the chief of the fire brigade.

“yes. it’s the second to-day.”

“well, i must say they’ve got some queer arrangements. though of course
it’s a broiling day,” said the chief of the fire brigade; then, turning
to the fireman who was leading the lame stallion, he shouted: “put him
into the corner stall. and as to you, you hound, i’ll teach you how to
cripple horses which are worth more than you are, you scoundrel.”

the dead man was taken from the cart by the policemen just in the same
way as the first had been, and carried upstairs into the hospital.
nekhludoff followed them as if he were hypnotised.

“what do you want?” asked one of the policemen. but nekhludoff did
not answer, and followed where the body was being carried. the madman,
sitting on a bed, was smoking greedily the cigarette nekhludoff had
given him.

“ah, you’ve come back,” he said, and laughed. when he saw the body he
made a face, and said, “again! i am sick of it. i am not a boy, am i,
eh?” and he turned to nekhludoff with a questioning smile.

nekhludoff was looking at the dead man, whose face, which had been
hidden by his cap, was now visible. this convict was as handsome in face
and body as the other was hideous. he was a man in the full bloom of
life. notwithstanding that he was disfigured by the half of his head
being shaved, the straight, rather low forehead, raised a bit over the
black, lifeless eyes, was very fine, and so was the nose above the
thin, black moustaches. there was a smile on the lips that were already
growing blue, a small beard outlined the lower part of the face, and on
the shaved side of the head a firm, well-shaped ear was visible.

one could see what possibilities of a higher life had been destroyed
in this man. the fine bones of his hands and shackled feet, the strong
muscles of all his well-proportioned limbs, showed what a beautiful,
strong, agile human animal this had been. as an animal merely he had
been a far more perfect one of his kind than the bay stallion, about the
laming of which the fireman was so angry.

yet he had been done to death, and no one was sorry for him as a man,
nor was any one sorry that so fine a working animal had perished. the
only feeling evinced was that of annoyance because of the bother caused
by the necessity of getting this body, threatening putrefaction, out of
the way. the doctor and his assistant entered the hospital, accompanied
by the inspector of the police station. the doctor was a thick-set man,
dressed in pongee silk coat and trousers of the same material, closely
fitting his muscular thighs. the inspector was a little fat fellow, with
a red face, round as a ball, which he made still broader by a habit he
had of filling his cheeks with air, and slowly letting it out again. the
doctor sat down on the bed by the side of the dead man, and touched
the hands in the same way as his assistant had done, put his ear to the
heart, rose, and pulled his trousers straight. “could not be more dead,”
 he said.

the inspector filled his mouth with air and slowly blew it out again.

“which prison is he from?” he asked the convoy soldier.

the soldier told him, and reminded him of the chains on the dead man’s
feet.

“i’ll have them taken off; we have got a smith about, the lord be
thanked,” said the inspector, and blew up his cheeks again; he went
towards the door, slowly letting out the air.

“why has this happened?” nekhludoff asked the doctor.

the doctor looked at him through his spectacles.

“why has what happened? why they die of sunstroke, you mean? this is
why: they sit all through the winter without exercise and without light,
and suddenly they are taken out into the sunshine, and on a day like
this, and they march in a crowd so that they get no air, and sunstroke
is the result.”

“then why are they sent out?”

“oh, as to that, go and ask those who send them. but may i ask who are
you?”

“i am a stranger.”

“ah, well, good-afternoon; i have no time.” the doctor was vexed; he
gave his trousers a downward pull, and went towards the beds of the
sick.

“well, how are you getting on?” he asked the pale man with the crooked
mouth and bandaged neck.

meanwhile the madman sat on a bed, and having finished his cigarette,
kept spitting in the direction of the doctor.

nekhludoff went down into the yard and out of the gate past the
firemen’s horses and the hens and the sentinel in his brass helmet, and
got into the trap, the driver of which had again fallen asleep.



chapter xxxviii.

the convict train.

when nekhludoff came to the station, the prisoners were all seated in
railway carriages with grated windows. several persons, come to see
them off, stood on the platform, but were not allowed to come up to the
carriages.

the convoy was much troubled that day. on the way from the prison to the
station, besides the two nekhludoff had seen, three other prisoners
had fallen and died of sunstroke. one was taken to the nearest police
station like the first two, and the other two died at the railway
station. [in moscow, in the beginning of the eighth decade of this
century, five convicts died of sunstroke in one day on their way from
the boutyrki prison to the nijni railway station.] the convoy men were
not troubled because five men who might have been alive died while in
their charge. this did not trouble them, but they were concerned lest
anything that the law required in such cases should be omitted. to
convey the bodies to the places appointed, to deliver up their papers,
to take them off the lists of those to be conveyed to nijni--all this
was very troublesome, especially on so hot a day.

it was this that occupied the convoy men, and before it could all be
accomplished nekhludoff and the others who asked for leave to go up to
the carriages were not allowed to do so. nekhludoff, however, was soon
allowed to go up, because he tipped the convoy sergeant. the sergeant
let nekhludoff pass, but asked him to be quick and get his talk over
before any of the authorities noticed. there were 15 carriages in all,
and except one carriage for the officials, they were full of prisoners.
as nekhludoff passed the carriages he listened to what was going on in
them. in all the carriages was heard the clanging of chains, the sound
of bustle, mixed with loud and senseless language, but not a word was
being said about their dead fellow-prisoners. the talk was all about
sacks, drinking water, and the choice of seats.

looking into one of the carriages, nekhludoff saw convoy soldiers taking
the manacles off the hands of the prisoners. the prisoners held out
their arms, and one of the soldiers unlocked the manacles with a key and
took them off; the other collected them.

after he had passed all the other carriages, nekhludoff came up to the
women’s carriages. from the second of these he heard a woman’s groans:
“oh, oh, oh! o god! oh, oh! o god!”

nekhludoff passed this carriage and went up to a window of the third
carriage, which a soldier pointed out to him. when he approached his
face to the window, he felt the hot air, filled with the smell of
perspiration, coming out of it, and heard distinctly the shrill sound
of women’s voices. all the seats were filled with red, perspiring,
loudly-talking women, dressed in prison cloaks and white jackets.
nekhludoff’s face at the window attracted their attention. those nearest
ceased talking and drew closer. maslova, in her white jacket and her
head uncovered, sat by the opposite window. the white-skinned, smiling
theodosia sat a little nearer. when she recognised nekhludoff, she
nudged maslova and pointed to the window. maslova rose hurriedly, threw
her kerchief over her black hair, and with a smile on her hot, red face
came up to the window and took hold of one of the bars.

“well, it is hot,” she said, with a glad smile.

“did you get the things?”

“yes, thank you.”

“is there anything more you want?” asked nekhludoff, while the air came
out of the hot carriage as out of an oven.

“i want nothing, thank you.”

“if we could get a drink?” said theodosia.

“yes, if we could get a drink,” repeated maslova.

“why, have you not got any water?”

“they put some in, but it is all gone.”

“directly, i will ask one of the convoy men. now we shall not see each
other till we get to nijni.”

“why? are you going?” said maslova, as if she did not know it, and
looked joyfully at nekhludoff.

“i am going by the next train.”

maslova said nothing, but only sighed deeply.

“is it true, sir, that 12 convicts have been done to death?” said a
severe-looking old prisoner with a deep voice like a man’s.

it was korableva.

“i did not hear of 12; i have seen two,” said nekhludoff.

“they say there were 12 they killed. and will nothing be done to them?
only think! the fiends!”

“and have none of the women fallen ill?” nekhludoff asked.

“women are stronger,” said another of the prisoners--a short little
woman, and laughed; “only there’s one that has taken it into her head to
be delivered. there she goes,” she said, pointing to the next carriage,
whence proceeded the groans.

“you ask if we want anything,” said maslova, trying to keep the smile
of joy from her lips; “could not this woman be left behind, suffering as
she is? there, now, if you would tell the authorities.”

“yes, i will.”

“and one thing more; could she not see her husband, taras?” she added,
pointing with her eyes to the smiling theodosia.

“he is going with you, is he not?”

“sir, you must not talk,” said a convoy sergeant, not the one who had
let nekhludoff come up. nekhludoff left the carriage and went in search
of an official to whom he might speak for the woman in travail and about
taras, but could not find him, nor get an answer from any of the convoy
for a long time. they were all in a bustle; some were leading a prisoner
somewhere or other, others running to get themselves provisions, some
were placing their things in the carriages or attending on a lady
who was going to accompany the convoy officer, and they answered
nekhludoff’s questions unwillingly. nekhludoff found the convoy officer
only after the second bell had been rung. the officer with his short
arm was wiping the moustaches that covered his mouth and shrugging his
shoulders, reproving the corporal for something or other.

“what is it you want?” he asked nekhludoff.

“you’ve got a woman there who is being confined, so i thought best--”

“well, let her be confined; we shall see later on,” and briskly swinging
his short arms, he ran up to his carriage. at the moment the guard
passed with a whistle in his hand, and from the people on the platform
and from the women’s carriages there arose a sound of weeping and words
of prayer.

nekhludoff stood on the platform by the side of taras, and looked how,
one after the other, the carriages glided past him, with the shaved
heads of the men at the grated windows. then the first of the women’s
carriages came up, with women’s heads at the windows, some covered with
kerchiefs and some uncovered, then the second, whence proceeded the same
groans, then the carriage where maslova was. she stood with the others
at the window, and looked at nekhludoff with a pathetic smile.



chapter xxxix.

brother and sister.

there were still two hours before the passenger train by which
nekhludoff was going would start. he had thought of using this interval
to see his sister again; but after the impressions of the morning he
felt much excited and so done up that, sitting down on a sofa in the
first-class refreshment-room, he suddenly grew so drowsy that he turned
over on to his side, and, laying his face on his hand, fell asleep at
once. a waiter in a dress coat with a napkin in his hand woke him.

“sir, sir, are you not prince nekhludoff? there’s a lady looking for
you.”

nekhludoff started up and recollected where he was and all that had
happened in the morning.

he saw in his imagination the procession of prisoners, the dead bodies,
the railway carriages with barred windows, and the women locked up in
them, one of whom was groaning in travail with no one to help her, and
another who was pathetically smiling at him through the bars.

the reality before his eyes was very different, i.e., a table with
vases, candlesticks and crockery, and agile waiters moving round the
table, and in the background a cupboard and a counter laden with fruit
and bottles, behind it a barman, and in front the backs of passengers
who had come up for refreshments. when nekhludoff had risen and sat
gradually collecting his thoughts, he noticed that everybody in the
room was inquisitively looking at something that was passing by the open
doors.

he also looked, and saw a group of people carrying a chair on which sat
a lady whose head was wrapped in a kind of airy fabric.

nekhludoff thought he knew the footman who was supporting the chair in
front. and also the man behind, and a doorkeeper with gold cord on his
cap, seemed familiar. a lady’s maid with a fringe and an apron, who was
carrying a parcel, a parasol, and something round in a leather case,
was walking behind the chair. then came prince korchagin, with his thick
lips, apoplectic neck, and a travelling cap on his head; behind him
missy, her cousin misha, and an acquaintance of nekhludoff’s--the
long-necked diplomat osten, with his protruding adam’s apple and his
unvarying merry mood and expression. he was saying something very
emphatically, though jokingly, to the smiling missy. the korchagins were
moving from their estate near the city to the estate of the princess’s
sister on the nijni railway. the procession--the men carrying the
chair, the maid, and the doctor--vanished into the ladies’ waiting-room,
evoking a feeling of curiosity and respect in the onlookers. but the old
prince remained and sat down at the table, called a waiter, and ordered
food and drink. missy and osten also remained in the refreshment-room
and were about to sit down, when they saw an acquaintance in the
doorway, and went up to her. it was nathalie rogozhinsky. nathalie came
into the refreshment-room accompanied by agraphena petrovna, and both
looked round the room. nathalie noticed at one and the same moment both
her brother and missy. she first went up to missy, only nodding to her
brother; but, having kissed her, at once turned to him.

“at last i have found you,” she said. nekhludoff rose to greet missy,
misha, and osten, and to say a few words to them. missy told him about
their house in the country having been burnt down, which necessitated
their moving to her aunt’s. osten began relating a funny story about a
fire. nekhludoff paid no attention, and turned to his sister.

“how glad i am that you have come.”

“i have been here a long time,” she said. “agraphena petrovna is with
me.” and she pointed to agraphena petrovna, who, in a waterproof and
with a bonnet on her head, stood some way off, and bowed to him with
kindly dignity and some confusion, not wishing to intrude.

“we looked for you everywhere.”

“and i had fallen asleep here. how glad i am that you have come,”
 repeated nekhludoff. “i had begun to write to you.”

“really?” she said, looking frightened. “what about?”

missy and the gentleman, noticing that an intimate conversation was
about to commence between the brother and sister, went away. nekhludoff
and his sister sat down by the window on a velvet-covered sofa, on which
lay a plaid, a box, and a few other things.

“yesterday, after i left you, i felt inclined to return and express my
regret, but i did not know how he would take it,” said nekhludoff. “i
spoke hastily to your husband, and this tormented me.”

“i knew,” said his sister, “that you did not mean to. oh, you know!” and
the tears came to her eyes, and she touched his hand. the sentence was
not clear, but he understood it perfectly, and was touched by what it
expressed. her words meant that, besides the love for her husband which
held her in its sway, she prized and considered important the love she
had for him, her brother, and that every misunderstanding between them
caused her deep suffering.

“thank you, thank you. oh! what i have seen to-day!” he said, suddenly
recalling the second of the dead convicts. “two prisoners have been done
to death.”

“done to death? how?”

“yes, done to death. they led them in this heat, and two died of
sunstroke.”

“impossible! what, to-day? just now?”

“yes, just now. i have seen their bodies.”

“but why done to death? who killed them?” asked nathalie.

“they who forced them to go killed them,” said nekhludoff, with
irritation, feeling that she looked at this, too, with her husband’s
eyes.

“oh, lord!” said agraphena petrovna, who had come up to them.

“yes, we have not the slightest idea of what is being done to these
unfortunate beings. but it ought to be known,” added nekhludoff, and
looked at old korchagin, who sat with a napkin tied round him and a
bottle before him, and who looked round at nekhludoff.

“nekhludoff,” he called out, “won’t you join me and take some
refreshment? it is excellent before a journey.”

nekhludoff refused, and turned away.

“but what are you going to do?” nathalie continued.

“what i can. i don’t know, but i feel i must do something. and i shall
do what i am able to.”

“yes, i understand. and how about them?” she continued, with a smile and
a look towards korchagin. “is it possible that it is all over?”

“completely, and i think without any regret on either side.”

“it is a pity. i am sorry. i am fond of her. however, it’s all right.
but why do you wish to bind yourself?” she added shyly. “why are you
going?”

“i go because i must,” answered nekhludoff, seriously and dryly, as if
wishing to stop this conversation. but he felt ashamed of his coldness
towards his sister at once. “why not tell her all i am thinking?” he
thought, “and let agraphena petrovna also hear it,” he thought, with
a look at the old servant, whose presence made the wish to repeat his
decision to his sister even stronger.

“you mean my intention to marry katusha? well, you see, i made up my
mind to do it, but she refuses definitely and firmly,” he said, and his
voice shook, as it always did when he spoke of it. “she does not wish
to accept my sacrifice, but is herself sacrificing what in her position
means much, and i cannot accept this sacrifice, if it is only a
momentary impulse. and so i am going with her, and shall be where she
is, and shall try to lighten her fate as much as i can.”

nathalie said nothing. agraphena petrovna looked at her with a
questioning look, and shook her head. at this moment the former
procession issued from the ladies’ room. the same handsome footman
(philip). and the doorkeeper were carrying the princess korchagin. she
stopped the men who were carrying her, and motioned to nekhludoff to
approach, and, with a pitiful, languishing air, she extended her white,
ringed hand, expecting the firm pressure of his hand with a sense of
horror.

“epouvantable!” she said, meaning the heat. “i cannot stand it! ce
climat me tue!” and, after a short talk about the horrors of the russian
climate, she gave the men a sign to go on.

“be sure and come,” she added, turning her long face towards nekhludoff
as she was borne away.

the procession with the princess turned to the right towards the
first-class carriages. nekhludoff, with the porter who was carrying his
things, and taras with his bag, turned to the left.

“this is my companion,” said nekhludoff to his sister, pointing to
taras, whose story he had told her before.

“surely not third class?” said nathalie, when nekhludoff stopped in
front of a third-class carriage, and taras and the porter with the
things went in.

“yes; it is more convenient for me to be with taras,” he said. “one
thing more,” he added; “up to now i have not given the kousminski
land to the peasants; so that, in case of my death, your children will
inherit it.”

“dmitri, don’t!” said nathalie.

“if i do give it away, all i can say is that the rest will be theirs,
as it is not likely i shall marry; and if i do marry i shall have no
children, so that--”

“dmitri, don’t talk like that!” said nathalie. and yet nekhludoff
noticed that she was glad to hear him say it.

higher up, by the side of a first-class carriage, there stood a group of
people still looking at the carriage into which the princess korchagin
had been carried. most of the passengers were already seated. some of
the late comers hurriedly clattered along the boards of the platform,
the guard was closing the doors and asking the passengers to get in and
those who were seeing them off to come out.

nekhludoff entered the hot, smelling carriage, but at once stepped out
again on to the small platform at the back of the carriage. nathalie
stood opposite the carriage, with her fashionable bonnet and cape,
by the side of agraphena petrovna, and was evidently trying to find
something to say.

she could not even say ecrivez, because they had long ago laughed
at this word, habitually spoken by those about to part. the short
conversation about money matters had in a moment destroyed the tender
brotherly and sisterly feelings that had taken hold of them. they felt
estranged, so that nathalie was glad when the train moved; and she
could only say, nodding her head with a sad and tender look, “goodbye,
good-bye, dmitri.” but as soon as the carriage had passed her she
thought of how she should repeat her conversation with her brother to
her husband, and her face became serious and troubled.

nekhludoff, too, though he had nothing but the kindest feelings for
his sister, and had hidden nothing from her, now felt depressed and
uncomfortable with her, and was glad to part. he felt that the nathalie
who was once so near to him no longer existed, and in her place was only
a slave of that hairy, unpleasant husband, who was so foreign to him. he
saw it clearly when her face lit up with peculiar animation as he spoke
of what would peculiarly interest her husband, i.e., the giving up of
the land to the peasants and the inheritance.

and this made him sad.



chapter xl.

the fundamental law of human life.

the heat in the large third-class carriage, which had been standing in
the burning sun all day, was so great that nekhludoff did not go in,
but stopped on the little platform behind the carriage which formed a
passage to the next one. but there was not a breath of fresh air here
either, and nekhludoff breathed freely only when the train had passed
the buildings and the draught blew across the platform.

“yes, killed,” he repeated to himself, the words he had used to his
sister. and in his imagination in the midst of all other impressions
there arose with wonderful clearness the beautiful face of the second
dead convict, with the smile of the lips, the severe expression of the
brows, and the small, firm ear below the shaved bluish skull.

and what seemed terrible was that he had been murdered, and no one knew
who had murdered him. yet he had been murdered. he was led out like all
the rest of the prisoners by maslennikoff’s orders. maslennikoff had
probably given the order in the usual manner, had signed with his stupid
flourish the paper with the printed heading, and most certainly would
not consider himself guilty. still less would the careful doctor who
examined the convicts consider himself guilty. he had performed his duty
accurately, and had separated the weak. how could he have foreseen this
terrible heat, or the fact that they would start so late in the day and
in such crowds? the prison inspector? but the inspector had only carried
into execution the order that on a given day a certain number of exiles
and convicts--men and women--had to be sent off. the convoy officer
could not be guilty either, for his business was to receive a certain
number of persons in a certain place, and to deliver up the same number.
he conducted them in the usual manner, and could not foresee that two
such strong men as those nekhludoff saw would not be able to stand it
and would die. no one is guilty, and yet the men have been murdered by
these people who are not guilty of their murder.

“all this comes,” nekhludoff thought, “from the fact that all these
people, governors, inspectors, police officers, and men, consider that
there are circumstances in which human relations are not necessary
between human beings. all these men, maslennikoff, and the inspector,
and the convoy officer, if they were not _governor, inspector, officer,_
would have considered twenty times before sending people in such heat
in such a mass--would have stopped twenty times on the way, and, seeing
that a man was growing weak, gasping for breath, would have led him
into the shade, would have given him water and let him rest, and if an
accident had still occurred they would have expressed pity. but they
not only did not do it, but hindered others from doing it, because they
considered not men and their duty towards them but only the office they
themselves filled, and held what that office demanded of them to be
above human relations. that’s what it is,” nekhludoff went on in his
thoughts. “if one acknowledges but for a single hour that anything
can be more important than love for one’s fellowmen, even in some
one exceptional case, any crime can be committed without a feeling of
guilt.”

nekhludoff was so engrossed by his thoughts that he did not notice how
the weather changed. the sun was covered over by a low-hanging, ragged
cloud. a compact, light grey cloud was rapidly coming from the west, and
was already falling in heavy, driving rain on the fields and woods far
in the distance. moisture, coming from the cloud, mixed with the air.
now and then the cloud was rent by flashes of lightning, and peals of
thunder mingled more and more often with the rattling of the train. the
cloud came nearer and nearer, the rain-drops driven by the wind began
to spot the platform and nekhludoff’s coat; and he stepped to the other
side of the little platform, and, inhaling the fresh, moist air--filled
with the smell of corn and wet earth that had long been waiting for
rain--he stood looking at the gardens, the woods, the yellow rye fields,
the green oatfields, the dark-green strips of potatoes in bloom, that
glided past. everything looked as if covered over with varnish--the
green turned greener, the yellow yellower, the black blacker.

“more! more!” said nekhludoff, gladdened by the sight of gardens and
fields revived by the beneficent shower. the shower did not last long.
part of the cloud had come down in rain, part passed over, and the last
fine drops fell straight on to the earth. the sun reappeared,
everything began to glisten, and in the east--not very high above the
horizon--appeared a bright rainbow, with the violet tint very distinct
and broken only at one end.

“why, what was i thinking about?” nekhludoff asked himself when all
these changes in nature were over, and the train ran into a cutting
between two high banks.

“oh! i was thinking that all those people (inspector, convoy men--all
those in the service) are for the greater part kind people--cruel only
because they are serving.” he recalled maslennikoff’s indifference when
he told him about what was being done in the prison, the inspector’s
severity, the cruelty of the convoy officer when he refused places on
the carts to those who asked for them, and paid no attention to the fact
